The roject utenberg ook of The haring ross ystery, by . . letcher

This eook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited tates and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  ou may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the roject utenberg icense included with this eook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the nited tates, youll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title The haring ross ystery

Author . . letcher

elease ate uly ,  ook 

anguage nglish

haracter set encoding T-

 TAT O THI OT T OO TH HAI O T 




roduced by Al Haines









TH HAI O T




. . TH



HT I IIT

 O TT, OO, .W.




A HT I OO



ith printing completing , copies



rinted in reat ritain by utler  Tanner td., rome and ondon




OTT


HAT

     I.  TH AT TAI AT
    II.  WHO OTAIT I THI?
   III.  TH OTTIA OT
    I.  TH IAO A
     .  TH OI T
    I.  A O I
   II.  A T
  III.  IWOO T
    I.  TH II OTT
     .  TH TIO  IITO
    I.  A IA
   II.  AIA AA ITO
  III.  WHO WA H?
   I.  I IT AAI?
    .  ATIO
   I.  TI O
  II.  TH TO A
 III.  TH TA
   I.  TH OO OA
    .  OI TA
   I.  TH O I WITI
  II.  TH HIH-TA OIITO
 III.  TH AA O ITT ITH TT
  I.  TH HO I TH A
   .  A
  I.  WATOO
 II.  TH AA




TH HAI O T


HAT I

TH AT TAI AT

Hetherwick had dined that evening with friends who lived in adogan
ardens, and had stayed so late in conversation with his host that
midnight had come before he left and set out for his bachelor chambers
in the Temple it was, indeed, by the fraction of a second that he
caught the last east-bound train at loane uare.  The train was
almost destitute of passengers the car which he himself entered, a
first-class smoking compartment, was otherwise empty no one came into
it when the train reached ictoria.  ut at t. amess ark two men
got in, and seated themselves opposite to Hetherwick.

ow Hetherwick was a young barrister, going in for criminal practice,
in whom the observant faculty was deeply implanted it was natural to
him to watch and to speculate on anything he saw.  ecause of this, and
perhaps because he had just then nothing else to think about, he sat
observing the new-comers he found interest, amusement, and not a
little profit in this sort of thing, and in trying to decide whether a
given man was this, that, or something else.

Of the two men thus under inspection, the elder was a big, burly,
fresh-coloured man of apparently sity to sity-five years of age.  His
closely cropped silvery hair, his smartly trained grey moustache, his
keen blue eyes and generally alert and vivacious appearance, made
Hetherwick think that he was or had been in some way or other connected
with the army this impression was heightened by an erect carriage,
suare-set shoulders and something that suggested a long and close
acuaintance with the methods of the drill-yard and the parade ground.
erhaps, thought Hetherwick, he was a retired non-commissioned officer,
a regimental sergeant-major, or something of that sort this idea,
again, was strengthened by the fact that the man carried a handsome
walking-cane, the head of which, either of gold or of silver-gilt, was
fashioned like a crown.  There was something military, too, about the
cut of his clothes he was a smartly dressed man, from his silk hat,
new and glossy and worn a little rakishly on the right side of his
head, to his highly polished boots.  A well-preserved, cheery-looking,
good-humoured sort of person, this, decided Hetherwick, and apparently
well satisfied with himself and full of the enjoyment of life, and
likely, from all outward sight, to make old bones.

The other man came into a different category.  The difference began
with his clothes, which, if not eactly shabby, were semi-shabby, much
worn, ill-kept and badly put on he was evidently a careless man, who
scorned a clothes-brush and was also indifferent to the very obvious
fact that his linen was frayed and dirty.  He was a thin, meagre man,
of not one-half the respectable, well-fed bulk of his companion his
sallow-compleioned face was worn, and his beard thin and irregular
altogether he suggested some degree of poor circumstances.  et, in
Hetherwicks opinion, he was a person of something beyond ordinary
mental capacity his eyes were large and intelligent, his nose was
well-shaped, his chin suare and determined.  And his ungloved hands
were finely moulded and delicate of proportion the fingers were long,
thin and tapering.  Hetherwick noticed two facts about those fingers
the first, that they were restless the second, that they were much
stained, as if the man had recently been miing dyes or using
chemicals.  And then he suddenly observed that the big mans hands and
fingers were similarly stained--blue and red and yellow, in patches.

These men were talking when they entered the compartment they
continued to talk as they settled down.  Hetherwick could not avoid
hearing what they said.

"ueerest eperience Ive ever had in my time" the big man was saying
as he dropped into a corner seat.  "Tell you, I knew her the instant I
clapped eyes on that portrait  After--how many years will it be, now?
Ten, I think--yes, ten.  Oh, yes  new her well enough.  When we get
to my hotel, Ill show you the portrait--I cut it out and put it
aside--and youll identify it as uick as I did--lay you aught you like
on it  o mistaking that"

This was said in a broad orth ountry accent, in full keeping, thought
Hetherwick, with the burly frame of the speaker.  ut the other man
replied in tones that suggested the born ondoner.

"I think I shall be able to recognise it," he said softly.  "Ive a
very clear recollection of the lady, though, to be sure, I only saw her
once or twice."

"Aye, well, a fine-looking woman--and a beauty--like thats not soon
forgotten," declared the other.  "And nowadays the years dont seem to
make much difference to a womans age.  Anyway, I knew her--Thats
you, my fine madam, says I to myself, as soon as ever I unfolded that
paper.  ut, mind you, I kept it to myself  ot a word to my
granddaughter, though she was sitting opposite to me when I made the
discovery.  o--not to anybody--till to-night.  ot the sort of thing
to blab about--that"

"ust so," said the smaller man.  "Of course, youd remember that I was
likely to have some recollection of her and of the circumstances.
Odd--very.  And I suppose the net thing is--what are you going to do
about it?"

"Oh, well" replied the big man.  "Of course, ten years have elapsed.
ut as to that, it wouldnt matter, you know, if twenty years had
slipped by.  till----"

At that point he sank his voice to the least of a whisper, bending over
to his companion, and Hetherwick heard no more.  ut it seemed to him
that the little man, although he appeared to be listening intently,
was, in reality, doing nothing of the sort.  His long, stained fingers
became more restless than ever twice, before the train came to
Westminster, he pulled out his watch and glanced at it once, after
that, Hetherwick caught the nervous hand again shaking towards the
waistcoat pocket.  And he got an idea that the man was regarding his
big, garrulous companion with curiously furtive glances, as if he were
waiting for some vague, yet epected thing, and wondering when it would
materialise there was a covert watchfulness about him, and though he
nodded his head from time to time as if in assent to what was being
whispered to him, Hetherwick became convinced that he was either
abstracted in thought or taking no interest.  If eyes and fingers were
to be taken as indications, the mans thoughts were elsewhere.

The train pulled up at Westminster, lingered its half-minute, moved
onward again the big man, still bending down to his companion, went on
whispering now and then, as if he were telling a good story or making
a clever point, he chuckled.  ut suddenly, and without any warning, he
paused, coming to a dead, sharp-cut stop in an apparently easy flow of
language.  He stared wildly around him Hetherwick caught the flash of
his eye as it swept the compartment, and never forgot the look of
frightened amaement that he saw in it it was as if the man had been
caught, with lightning-like swiftness, face to face with some awful
thing.  His left hand shut up, clutching at his breast and throat the
other, releasing the gold-headed cane, shot out as if to ward off a
blow.  It dropped like lead at his side the other arm relaed and
fell, limp and nerveless, and before Hetherwick could move, the big,
burly figure sank back in its corner and the eyes closed.

Hetherwick jumped from his seat, shouting to the other man.

"our friend" he cried.  "ook"

ut the other man was looking.  He, too, had got to his feet, and he
was bending down and stretching out a hand to the big mans wrist.  He
muttered something that Hetherwick failed to catch.

"What do you say?" demanded Hetherwick impatiently.  "ood heavens--we
must do something  The mans--what is it?  A seiure?"

"A seiure" answered the other.  "es--thats it--a seiure  Hed had
one--slight giddiness--just before we got in.  A--the trains stopping,
though.  haring ross?  I--I know a doctor close by."

The train was already pulling up.  Hetherwick flung open the dividing
door between his compartment and the net--he had seen the conductor
down there and he beckoned to him.

"uick" he called.  "Here--theres a man ill--dying, I think  ome
here"

The conductor came--slowly.  ut when he saw the man in the corner, he
made for the outer door and beckoned to men on the platform.  A
uniformed official ran up and got in.

"What is it?" he asked.  "entleman in a fit?  Whos with him?
Anybody?"

Hetherwick looked round for the man with the stained fingers.  ut he
was already out of the carriage and on the platform and making for the
stairs that led to the eit.  He flung back a few words, pointing
upward at the same time.

"octor--close by" he shouted.  "ack in five minutes--get him out."

ut already there was a doctor at hand.  efore the man with the
stained fingers had fairly vanished, other men had come in from the
adjoining compartments one pushed his way to the front.

"I am a medical man," he said curtly.  "ake way, please."

The other men stood silently watching while the new-comer made a hasty
eamination of the still figure.  He turned sharply.

"This mans dead" he said in uick, matter-of-fact tones.  "Is anyone
with him?"

The train officials glanced at Hetherwick.  ut Hetherwick shook his
head.

"I dont know him," he answered.  "There was another man with him--they
got in together at t. amess ark.  ou saw the other man," he
continued, turning to the conductor.  "He jumped out as you came in
here, and ran up the stairs, saying that he was going for some doctor,
close by."

"I saw him--heard him, too," assented the conductor.  He glanced at the
stairs and the eit beyond.  "ut he aint come back," he added.

"ou had better get the man out," said the doctor.  "ring him in to
some place on the platform."

A station policeman had come up by that time he and the railwaymen
lifted the dead man and carried him across the platform to a
waiting-room.  Hetherwick, feeling that he would be wanted, followed in
the rear, the doctor with him.  It struck Hetherwick with grim irony
that as soon as they were off it, the train went on, as if careless and
indifferent.

"ood heavens" he muttered, more to himself than to the man at his
side.  "That poor fellow was alive, and, as far as I could see, in the
very best of health and spirits, five minutes ago"

"o doubt" observed the doctor dryly.  "ut hes dead now.  What
happened?"

Hetherwick told him briefly.

"And the other mans--gone" remarked the doctor.  "m  ut I suppose
nobody thought of detaining him.  ow--if he doesnt come back--eh?"

"ou dont suspect foul play?" eclaimed Hetherwick.

"The circumstances are odd," said his companion.  "I should say the man
just died  ied as suddenly as man can die--as if hed been shot dead
or literally blown to fragments.  Thats from what you tell me, you
know.  And it may be--a case of poisoning.  Will that other man come
back?  If not----"

y that time Hetherwick was beginning to wonder if the other man would
come back.  He had not come at the end of ten minutes nor of fifteen
nor of thirty.  ut other men had come, hurrying into the drab-walled
waiting-room and gathering about the table on which the dead man had
been laid.  They were mostly officials and police, and presently a
police surgeon arrived and with him a police inspector, one
atherfield, who knew Hetherwick.  While the two doctors made another
eamination, this man drew Hetherwick aside.  Hetherwick retold his
story this time with full details.  atherfield listened and shook his
head.

"That second man wont come back" he said.  "one half an hour now.
o you think he knew the man was dead before he cleared out?"

"I cant say," replied Hetherwick.  "The whole thing was so uick that
it was all over before I could realise what was happening.  I certainly
saw the other man give the dead man a uick, close inspection.  Then he
literally jumped for the door--he was out of it and running up the
stairs before the train had come to a definite stop."

"ou can describe him, r. Hetherwick?" suggested the inspector.

"escribe him?--yes.  And identify him, too," asserted Hetherwick.  "He
was a man of certain notable features.  I should know him again,
anywhere."

"Well, well have to look for him," said atherfield.  "And now well
have to take this dead man to the mortuary and have a thorough
eamination and see what hes got on him.  oud better come, r.
Hetherwick--in fact, I shall want you."

Hetherwick went--in the tail of a sombre procession, himself and the
two medical men walking together.  He had to tell his tale again, to
the police surgeon that functionary, like all the rest who had heard
the story, shook his head ominously over the disappearance of the
sallow-faced man.

"All an ecuse, that," he said.  "Theres no doctor close by.  ou
didnt get any idea--from their conversation, I mean--of the dead mans
identity?  Any name mentioned?"

"I heard no name mentioned," answered Hetherwick.  "They didnt address
each other by name.  Ive no idea who the man is."

That was what he wanted to know.  omewhere, of course, this dead man
had friends.  He had spoken of his hotel--there, perhaps, somebody was
awaiting his coming somebody to whom the news of his death would come
as a great shock, perhaps, and terrible trouble.  And he waited with a
feeling that was little short of personal aniety while the police
searched the dead mans pockets.

The various articles which were presently laid out on a side-table were
many.  There was a purse, well stocked with money there was loose
money in the pockets.  There was a handsome gold watch and a heavy
chain and locket.  There was a pocket-book, stuffed with letters and
papers.  And there were all the things that a well-provided man
carries--a cigar-case, a silver matchbo, a silver pencil-case, a
pen-knife, and so on clearly, the dead man had been in comfortable
circumstances.  ut the articles of value were brushed aside by the
inspector his immediate concern was with the contents of the
pocket-book, from which he hastened to take out the letters.  A second
later he turned to Hetherwick and the two doctors, nodding his head
sidewise at the still figure on the table.

"Thisll be the name and address," he said, pointing to the envelopes
in his hand.  "r. obert Hannaford, alters rivate Hotel, urrey
treet, trand.  everal letters, you see, addressed there, and all of
recent date.  Well have to go there--there may be his wife and people
of his there.  Wonder who he was?--somebody from the provinces, most
likely.  Well----"

He laid down the letters and picked up the watch--a fine gold-cased
hunter--and released the back.  Within that was an inscription,
engraved in delicate lettering.  The inspector let out an eclamation.

"Ah" he said.  "I half suspected that from his appearance.  One of
ourselves  ook at this--resented to uperintendent obert
Hannaford, on his retirement, by the agistrates of ellithwaite.
ellithwaite, eh?--wheres that, now?"

"orkshire," replied one of the men standing close by.  "outh-West
iding."

atherfield closed the watch and laid it by.

"Well," he remarked, "thats evidently who he is--e-uperintendent
Hannaford, of ellithwaite, orkshire, stopping at alters Hotel.
Ill have to go round there.  r. Hetherwick, as you were the last man
to see him alive, I wish youd go with me--its on your way to the
Temple."

omething closely corresponding to curiosity, not morbid, but
compelling, made Hetherwick accede to this reuest.  resently he and
atherfield walked along the mbankment together, talking of what had
just happened and speculating on the cause of Hannafords sudden death.

"We may know the eact reason by noon," remarked atherfield.
"Therell be a post-mortem, of course.  ut that other man--we may get
to know something about him here.  And I wonder whom we shall find
here?  Hope its not his wife...."




HAT II

WHO OTAIT I THI?

alter himself opened the door of his small private hotel a uiet,
reserved man who looked like a retired butler.  He was the sort of man
who is slow of speech, and he had not replied to atherfields guarded
inuiry about r. obert Hannaford when a door in the little hall
opened, and a girl appeared, who, hearing the inspectors uestion,
immediately came forward as if in answer.

Hetherwick recognised this girl.  He had seen her only the previous
afternoon in ountain ourt, in company with a man whom he knew
slightly--enthwaite, a fellow-barrister.  enthwaite, evidently, was
doing the honours--showing her round the Temple Hetherwick, in fact,
in passing them, had overheard enthwaite telling his companion
something of the history of the old houses and courts around them.  And
the girl had attracted him then.  he was a pretty girl, tall, slim,
graceful, and in addition to her undoubted charm of face and figure,
she looked to have more than an average share of character and
intelligence, and was listening to her guide with obvious interest and
appreciation.  Hetherwick had set her down as being, perhaps, a country
cousin of enthwaites, visiting ondon, maybe, for the first time.
Anyhow, in merely passing her and enthwaite he had noticed her so
closely that he now recognised her at once he saw, too, that she
recognised him.  ut there was another matter more pressing than
that--and she had gone straight to it.

"Are these gentlemen asking for my grandfather?" she inuired, coming
still nearer and glancing from the hotel proprietor to the two callers.
"Hes not come in----"

Hetherwick was glad to hear that the dead man was the girls
grandfather.  ertainly it was a close relationship, but, after all,
not so close as it might have been.  And he was conscious that the
inspector was relieved, too.

"Were asking about r. obert Hannaford," he said.  "Is he your
grandfather--e-uperintendent Hannaford, of ellithwaite?  ust
so--well, Im very sorry to bring bad news about him----"

He broke off, watching the girl keenly, as if he wanted to make sure
that she would take the news uietly.  And evidently reassured on that
point, he suddenly went on definitely

"oull understand?" he said.  "Its--well, the worst news.  The fact
is----"

"Is my grandfather dead?" interrupted the girl.  "If thats it, please
say so--I shant faint, or anything of that sort.  ut--I want to know"

"Im sorry to say he is dead," replied atherfield.  "He died suddenly
in the train at haring ross.  A seiure, no doubt.  Was he well when
you saw him last?"

The girl turned to the hotel proprietor, who was standing by, evidently
amaed.

"ever saw a gentleman look better or seem better in my life than he
did when he went out of that door at half-past si oclock" he
eclaimed.  "est of health and spirits"

"y grandfather was uite well," said the girl uietly.  "I never
remember him being anything else but well--he was a very strong,
vigorous man.  Will you please tell me all about it?"

atherfield told all about it, turning now and then to Hetherwick for
corroboration.  In the end he put a uestion.

"This man that r. Hetherwick saw in your grandfathers company?" he
suggested.  "o you recognise anyone from that description?"

"o--no one," answered the girl.  "ut my grandfather knew people in
ondon whom I dont know.  He has been going about a good deal since we
came here, three days ago--looking out for a house."

"Well, we shall have to find that man," remarked atherfield.  "Of
course, if youd recognised the description as that of somebody known
to you----"

"o," she said again.  "I know nobody like that.  ut now--do you wish
me to go with you--to him?"

"Its not necessary--I wouldnt to-night, if I were you," replied
atherfield.  "Ill call again in the morning.  eanwhile, leave
matters to us and the doctors.  ouve friends in ondon, I suppose?"

"es, we have friends--relations, in fact," said the girl.  "I must let
them know at once."

atherfield nodded and turned to the door.  ut Hetherwick lingered.
He and the girl were looking at each other.  He suddenly spoke.

"I saw you this afternoon," he said, "in ountain ourt, with a man
whom I know slightly, r. enthwaite.  Is he, by any chance, one of the
relations you mentioned just now?  ecause, if so, he lives close by
me.  I can tell him, if you wish."

"o," she answered, "not a relative.  We know him.  ou might tell him,
if you please, and if its no trouble."

"o trouble at all," said Hetherwick.  "And--if I may--I hope youll
let me call in the morning to hear if theres anything I can do for
you?"

The girl gave him a uick, responsive glance.

"Thats very kind of you," she said.  "es."

Hetherwick and the police inspector left the little hotel and walked up
the street.  atherfield seemed to be in a brown study.  omewhere up
in the trand and farther away down leet treet the clocks began
striking.

"eems to me," eclaimed atherfield suddenly, "seems to me, r.
Hetherwick, this is--murder"

"ou mean poison?" said Hetherwick.

"ikely  Why, yes, of course, it would be poison.  We must have that
man  ou cant add to your description of him?"

"ouve already got everything that I can tell.  retty full and
accurate, too.  I should say you oughtnt to have much difficulty in
laying hands on him--from my description."

atherfield made a sound that was half a laugh and half a groan.

"ord bless you" he said.  "Its like seeking a needle in a bundle of
hay, searching for a given man in ondon  I mean, of course,
sometimes.  ore often than not, in fact.  Heres this chap rushes up
the stairs at haring ross, vanishes--where?  One man amongst seven
millions of men and women  However----"

Then they parted, and Hetherwick, full of thought, went home to his
chambers and to bed, and lay eually thoughtful for a long time before
he went to sleep.  He made a poor night of it, but soon after eight
oclock he was in enthwaites chambers.  enthwaite was dressing and
breakfasting at the same time--a ready-packed brief bag and an open
time-table suggested that he was in a hurry to catch a train.  ut he
suspended his operations to stare, open-mouthed, wide-eyed at
Hetherwicks news.

"Hannaford--dead" he eclaimed.  "reat cott--why, he was as fit as
a fiddle at noon yesterday, Hetherwick  He and his grand daughter
called on me, and I took em to lunch--I come from ellithwaite, you
know, so of course I knew them.  Hannaford had to go as soon as wed
lunched--some appointment--so I showed the girl round a bit.  ice
girl, that--clever.  ame of hona.  Worth cultivating.  And the old
mans dead  less me"

"I dont think theres much doubt about foul play," observed Hetherwick.

"ooks uncommonly like it," said enthwaite.  He went on with his
double task.  "Well," he added, "sorry, but I cant be of any use to
iss Hannaford to-day--got to go down to a beastly uarter essions
case, my boy, and precious little time to catch my train.  ut
to-morrow--perhaps you can give m a hand this morning?"

"es," answered Hetherwick.  "Im doing nothing.  Ill go round there
after a while.  Im interested naturally.  Its a ueer case."

"ueer  eems so, rather," assented enthwaite.  "Well--give iss
Hannaford my sympathy and all that, and tell her that if theres
anything I can do when I get back--you know what to say."

"he said shed relations here in ondon," remarked Hetherwick.

"ousins--aunts--something or other--over Tooting way, I think," agreed
enthwaite.  "Twenty past eight--Hetherwick, Ill have to rush for it"

He swallowed the last of his coffee, seied the bag and darted away
Hetherwick went back to his own chambers and breakfasted leisurely.
And all the time he sat there he was pondering over the event of the
previous midnight, and especially upon the sudden disappearance of the
man with the stained fingers.  To Hetherwick that disappearance seemed
to argue guilt.  He figured it in this way--the man who ran away at
haring ross had poisoned this other man in some clever and subtle
fashion, by means of something which took a certain time to take
effect, and, when that time arrived, did its work with amaing
swiftness.  Hetherwick, in his war service, had seen men die more times
than he cared to remember.  He had seen some men shot through the
brain he had seen others shot through the heart.  ut he had never
seen any of these men--some of them shot at his very side--die with the
etraordinary uickness with which Hannaford had died.  And he came to
a conclusion if the man with the stained fingers had poisoned
Hannaford, then he was somebody who had a rare and a profound knowledge
of poisons.

He went round to urrey treet at ten oclock.  iss Hannaford, said
the hotel proprietor, had gone with her aunt, a rs. eeley, who had
come early that morning, to see her grandfathers dead body--some
police official had fetched them.  ut she had left a message for
anyone who called--that she would not be long away.  And Hetherwick
waited in the little dingy coffee-room there were certain uestions
that he wanted to put to hona Hannaford, also he wanted to give her
certain information.

"ery sad case this, sir," observed the hotel proprietor, hovering
about his breakfast-tables.  "ruel end for a fine healthy gentleman
like r. Hannaford"

"ery sad," agreed Hetherwick.  "ou said last night--or, rather, this
morning--that r. Hannaford was in good health and spirits when he went
out early in the evening?"

"The best, sir  He was a cheery, affable gentleman--fond of his joke.
oked and laughed with me as I opened the door for him--never thinking,
sir, as I should never see him again alive"

"ou dont know where he was going?"

"I dont, sir.  And his granddaughter--clever young lady, that,
sir--she dont know, neither.  he went to a theatre, along of her
aunt, the lady that came early this morning.  We wired the bad news to
her first thing, and she came along at once.  ut him--no, I dont know
where he went to spend his evening.  een in and out, and mostly out,
ever since they were here, three days ago.  House-hunting, so I
understood."

hona Hannaford presently returned, in company with a motherly-looking
woman whom she introduced as her aunt, rs. eeley.  Then Hetherwick
remembered that he had not introduced himself rectifying that
omission, he found that enthwaite had told hona who he was when he
passed them the previous afternoon.  He delivered enthwaites message
and in his absence offered his own services.

"Its very good of you," said hona.  "I dont know that theres
anything to do.  The police seem to be doing everything--the inspector
who was here last night was very kind just now, but, as he said,
theres nothing to be done until after the inuest."

"es," said Hetherwick.  "And that is--did he say when?"

"To-morrow morning.  He said I should have to go," replied hona.

"o shall I," observed Hetherwick.  "Theyll only want formal evidence
from you.  I shall have to say more.  I wish I could say more than I
shall have to say."

The two women glanced at him inuiringly.

"I mean," he continued, "that I wish I had stopped the other man from
leaving the train.  I suppose you have not heard anything from the
police about him--that man?"

"othing.  They had not found him or heard of him up to just now.  ut
you can tell me something that I very much want to know.  ou saw this
man with my grandfather for some little time, didnt you?"

"rom t. amess ark to haring ross."

"id you overhear their conversation, or any of it?"

"A good deal--at first.  Afterwards, your grandfather began to whisper,
and I heard nothing of that.  ut one reason I had for calling upon you
this morning was that I might tell you what I did overhear, and another
that I might ask you some uestions arising out of what I heard.  r.
Hannaford was talking to this man, now missing, about some portrait or
photograph.  vidently it was of a lady whom he, your grandfather, had
known ten years ago whom the other man had also known.  our
grandfather said that when they got to his hotel he would show the
portrait to the other man who, he asserted, would be sure to recognise
it.  ow, had r. Hannaford said anything to you?  o you know anything
about his bringing any friend of his to this hotel last night?  And do
you know anything about any portrait or photograph such as that to
which he referred?"

"About bringing anyone here--no  He never said anything to me about
it.  ut about a photograph, or rather about a print of one--yes.  I do
know something about that."

"What?" asked Hetherwick eagerly.

"Well, this," she answered.  "y grandfather, who, as I dare say you
know by this time, was for a good many years uperintendent of olice
at ellithwaite, had a habit of cutting things out of
newspapers--paragraphs, accounts of criminal trials, and so on.  He had
several boes full of such cuttings.  When we were coming to town the
other day I saw him cut a photograph out of some illustrated paper he
was reading in the train, and put it away in his pocket-book--in a
pocket-book, I ought to say, for he had two or three pocket-books.
This morning I was looking through various things which he had left
lying about on his dressing-table upstairs, and in one of his
pocket-books I found the photograph which he cut out in the train.
That must be the one you mention--its of a very handsome,
distinguished-looking woman."

"If I may see it----" suggested Hetherwick.

Within a couple of minutes he had the cutting in his hand--a scrap of
paper, neatly snipped out of its surrounding letterpress, which was a
print of a photograph of a woman of apparently thirty-five to forty
years of age, evidently of high position, and certainly, as hona
Hannaford had remarked, of handsome and distinguished features.  ut it
was not at the photograph that Hetherwick gaed with eyes into which
surmise and speculation were beginning to steal after a mere glance at
it, his attention fied itself on some pencilled words on the margin at
its sides

"Through my hands ten years ago"


"Is that your grandfathers writing?" he inuired suddenly.

"es, thats his," replied hona.  "He had a habit of pencilling notes
and comments on his cuttings--all sorts of remarks."

"He didnt mention this particular cutting to you when he cut it out?"

"o--he said nothing about it.  I saw him cut it out, and heard him
chuckle as he put it away, but he said--nothing."

"ou dont know who this lady is?"

"Oh, no  ou see, theres no name beneath it.  I suppose there was in
the paper, but he cut out nothing but the picture and the bit of
margin.  ut from what hes written there, I conclude that this is a
portrait of some woman who had been in trouble with the police at some
time or other."

"Obvious" muttered Hetherwick.  He sat silently inspecting the picture
for a minute or two.

"ook here," he said suddenly, "I want you to let me help in trying to
get at the bottom of this--naturally you want to have it cleared up.
And to begin with, let me have this cutting, and for the present dont
tell anyone--I mean the police or any inuirers--that I have it.  Id
like to have a talk about it to enthwaite.  ou understand?  As I was
present at your grandfathers death, Id like to solve the mystery of
it.  If youll leave this to me----"

"Oh, yes" replied hona.  "ut--you think there has been foul
play?--that he didnt die a natural death?--that it wasnt just heart
failure or----"

The door of the little coffee-room was opened and atherfield looked
in.  eeing Hetherwick there, he beckoned him into the hall, closing
the door again as the young barrister joined him.  Hetherwick saw that
he was full of news, and instantly thought of the man with the stained
fingers.

"Well?" he said eagerly, "laid your hands on that fellow?"

"Oh, him?--no" answered atherfield.  "ot a word or sign of him--so
far  ut the doctors have finished their post-mortem.  And theres no
doubt about their verdict.  oisoned"

atherfield sank his voice to a whisper as he spoke the last word.  And
Hetherwick, ready though he was for the news, started when he got
it--the definiteness of the announcement seemed like opening a window
upon a vista of obscured and misty distances.  He glanced at the door
behind him.

"Of course, theyll have to be told, in there," said atherfield,
interpreting his thoughts.  "ut the things certain.  Our surgeon
suspected it from the first, and he got a Home Office specialist to
help at the autopsy--they say the man was poisoned by some drug or
other--I dont understand these things--that had been administered to
him two or three hours before he died, and that when it did work,
worked with absolutely lightning-like effect."

"es," muttered Hetherwick thoughtfully.  "ightning-like effect--good
phrase.  I can testify that it did that"

atherfield laid a hand on the door.

"Well," he said, "Id better tell these ladies.  Then--there are things
I want to know from the granddaughter.  Ive seen her--and her
aunt--before this morning.  I found out that Hannaford brought up and
educated this girl, and that she lived with him in ellithwaite since
she left school, so shell know more about him than anybody.  And I
want to learn all I can.  ome in with me."




HAT III

TH OTTIA OT

lder and younger woman alike took atherfields intimation uietly.
hona made no remark.  ut rs. eeley spoke impulsively.

"There never was a more popular man than he was--with everybody" she
eclaimed.  "Who should want to take his life?"

"Thats just what weve got to find out, maam," said atherfield.
"And I want to know as much as I can--I dare say iss Hannaford can
tell me a lot.  ow, lets see what we do know from what you told me
this morning.  r. Hannaford had been uperintendent of olice at
ellithwaite for some years.  He had recently retired on his pension.
He proposed to live in ondon, and you and he, iss Hannaford, came to
ondon to look for a suitable house, arrived three days ago, and put up
at this hotel.  Thats all correct?  ery good--now then, let me hear
all about his movements during the last three days.  What did he do?
Where did he spend his time?"

"I cant tell you much," answered hona.  "He was out most of the day,
and generally by himself.  I was only out with him twice--once when we
went to do some shopping, another time when we called on r. enthwaite
at his rooms in the Temple.  I understood he was looking for a
house--seeing house agents and so on.  He was out morning, afternoon
and evening."

"id he never tell you anything about where hed been, or whom hed
seen?"

"o.  He was the sort of man who keeps things to himself.  I have no
idea where he went nor whom he saw."

"idnt say anything about where he was going last night?"

"o.  He only said that he was going out and that I should find him
here when I got back from the theatre, to which I was going with rs.
eeley.  We got back here soon after eleven.  ut he hadnt come in--as
you know."

"ou never heard him speak of having enemies?"

"I should think he hadnt an enemy in the world  He was a very kind
man and very popular, even with the people he had to deal with as a
police-superintendent."

"And I suppose hed no financial worries--anything of that sort?  or
any other troubles--nothing to bother him?"

"I dont think hed a care in the world," said hona confidently.  "He
was looking forward with real est to settling down in ondon.  And as
to financial worries, hed none.  He was well off."

"Always a saving, careful man," remarked rs. eeley.  "Oh, yes, uite
well off--apart from his pension."

atherfield glanced at Hetherwick, who had listened carefully to all
that was asked and answered.  omething in the glance seemed to invite
him to take a hand.

"This occurs to me," said Hetherwick.  He turned to hona.  "Apart from
this house-hunting, do you know whether your grandfather had any
business affair in hand in ondon?  What Im thinking of is this--from
what I saw of him in the train, he appeared to be an active, energetic
man, not the sort of man who, because hed retired, would sit down in
absolute idleness.  o you know of anything that he thought of
undertaking--any business he thought of joining?"

hona considered this uestion for a while.

"ot any business," she replied at last.  "ut there is something that
may have to do with what you suggest.  y grandfather had a hobby.  He
eperimented in his spare time."

"What in?" asked Hetherwick.  Then he suddenly remembered the stained
fingers that he had noticed on the hands of both men the night before.
"Was it chemicals?" he added uickly.

"es, in chemicals," she answered with a look of surprise.  "How did
you know that?"

"I noticed that his hands and fingers were stained," replied
Hetherwick.  "o were those of the man he was with.  Well--but this
something?"

"He had a little laboratory in our garden at ellithwaite," she
continued.  "He spent all his spare time in it--hed done that for
years.  ately, I know, hed been trying to invent or discover
something--I dont know what.  ut just before we left ellithwaite, he
told me that hed solved the problem, and when he was sorting out and
packing up his papers he showed me a sealed envelope in which he said
were the particulars of his big discovery--he said there was a
potential fortune in it and that he should die a rich man.  I saw him
put that envelope in a pocket-book which he always carried with him."

"That would be the pocket-book I eamined last night," said
atherfield.  "There was no sealed envelope, nor one of which any seal
had been broken, in that.  There was nothing but letters, receipts and
unimportant papers."

"It is not in his other pocket-books," declared hona.  "I went through
all his things myself very early this morning--through everything that
he had here.  I know that he had that envelope yesterday--he pulled out
some things from his pocket when we were lunching with r. enthwaite
in a restaurant in leet treet, and I saw the envelope.  It was a
stout, suare envelope, across the front of which he had drawn two
thick red lines, and it was heavily sealed with black sealing-wa at
the back."

"That was yesterday, you say?" asked atherfield sharply.  "esterday
noon?  ust so  Then as he had it yesterday at noon, and as it wasnt
in his pockets last night and is not among his effects in this house,
its very clear that between, say, two oclock yesterday and midnight
he parted with it.  ow then, to whom?  Thats a thing weve just got
to find out  ut youre sure he wasnt joking when he told you that
this discovery, or invention, or whatever it was, was worth a potential
fortune?"

"On the contrary, he was very serious," replied hona.  "nusually
serious for him.  He wouldnt tell me what it was, nor give me any
particulars--all he said was that hed solved a problem and hit on a
discovery that hed worked over for years, and that the secret was in
that envelope and worth no end of money.  I asked him what he meant by
no end of money and he said Well, at any rate, a hundred thousand
pounds--in time."

The two men echanged glances silence fell on the whole group.

"Oh" said atherfield at last.  "A secret worth a hundred thousand
pounds--in time.  This will have to be looked into--narrowly.  What do
you think, r. Hetherwick?"

"es," answered Hetherwick.  "ouve no idea, of course, as to whether
your grandfather had done anything about putting this discovery on the
market--or made any arrangement about selling it?  o  Well, can you
tell me this What sort of house did your grandfather want to rent here
in ondon?  I mean, do you know what rent he was prepared to pay?"

"I can answer that," remarked rs. eeley.  "He told me he wanted a
good house--a real good one--in a convenient suburb, and he was willing
to go up to three hundred a year."

"Three hundred a year," said Hetherwick.  He echanged a meaning glance
with atherfield.  "That," he added, "looks as if he felt assured of a
considerable income, and as though he had already realised on his
discovery or was very certain of doing so."

"To be sure," agreed atherfield.  "Of course, I dont know what his
private means were, but I know what his retiring pension would be--and
three hundred a year for rent alone means--a good deal  m--well
have to endeavour to trace that sealed envelope."

"It seems to me, atherfield," observed Hetherwick, "that the first
thing to do is to trace Hannafords movements last night, from the time
he left this hotel until his death in the train."

"Were at that already," replied atherfield.  "Weve a small army of
men at work.  ut as we want all the help we can get, Im going to stir
up the newspaper men, r. Hetherwick--the ress, sir, is always
valuable in this sort of thing--and I want iss Hannaford, if shes
got one, to give me a recent photograph of her grandfather so that it
can appear in the papers.  omebody, you know, may recognise
it--somebody who saw him last night with somebody else."

hona had a new photograph of the dead man, taken in plain clothes just
before he left ellithwaite, and she gave atherfield some copies of
it.  eproductions appeared in the eteor and other evening papers
that night, and in some of the dailies net morning.  And, as a result,
a man came forward at the inuest, a few hours later, who declared with
positive assurance that he had seen Hannaford early in the evening of
the murder.  His appearance was the only sensational thing about these
necessarily only preliminary proceedings before the coroner until he
stepped forward nothing had transpired with which Hetherwick was not
already familiar.  There had been his own evidence somewhat to his
surprise neither coroner nor police seemed to pay much attention to his
account of the conversation about the womans portrait they appeared
to regard Hannafords observations as a bit of garrulous reminiscence
about some criminal or other.  There had been honas--a repetition of
what she had told atherfield and Hetherwick at alters Hotel police
and coroner evidently fied on the missing sealed envelope and its
mysterious secret as a highly important factor in the case.  Then there
had been the epert testimony of the two doctors as to the cause of
death--that had been confined to positive declarations that Hannaford
died from the administration of some subtle poison, the eact details
being left over until eperts could tell more at the adjourned
proceedings.  And the coroner was about to adjourn for a fortnight when
a man, who had entered the court and been in conversation with the
officials, was put into the witness-bo to tell a story which certainly
added information and, at the same time, accentuated mystery.

This man was a highly-respectable person in appearance, middle-aged,
giving the name of artin harles edbitter, manager of an insurance
office in Westminster, and residing at utton, in urrey.  It was his
habit, he said, to travel every evening from ictoria to utton by the
. train.  As a rule he arrived at ictoria just before seven and
took a cup of tea in the refreshment-room.  He did this on the night
before last.  While he was drinking his tea at the counter, an elderly
man came in and stood by him, whom he was sure beyond doubt was the
same man whose photograph was reproduced in some of last nights and
some of this mornings newspapers.  He had no doubt whatever about
this.  He first noticed the mans stained fingers as he took up the
glass of whisky-and-soda which he had ordered he had, at the time,
wondered at the contrast between those fingers and the general
spick-and-spanness of the man and his smart attire also he had noticed
his gold-headed walking-cane and that the head was fashioned like a
crown.  They stood side by side for some minutes, then the man went
out.  A minute or two later he saw him again--this time at the
right-hand side bookstall he was there obviously looking out for
somebody.

This was the point where the interest really began everybody in court
strained eyes and ears as the coroner put a direct uestion.

"ooking out for somebody?  id you see him meet anybody?"

"I did"

"Tell me what you saw."

"I saw this.  When I approached the bookstall, to buy some evening
papers, the man whom I had seen in the refreshment-room was standing
close by.  He was looking about him, but chiefly at the entrances to
the big space between the offices and the platforms.  Once or twice he
looked at his watch.  It was then--by the station clock--about ten
minutes past seven.  He seemed impatient he moved restlessly about.  I
passed him and went to the bookstall.  When I turned round again he was
standing a few yards away, shaking hands with another man.  rom the
way in which they shook hands, I concluded that they were old friends,
who perhaps had not seen each other for some time."

"Their greeting was cordial?"

"I should call it effusive."

"an you describe the other man?"

"I can describe a sort of general impression of both.  He was a tall
man, taller than Hannaford, but not so broadly built.  He wore a dark
ulster overcoat, with a strap at the back it was either a very dark
blue or a black in colour.  He had a silk hat--new and glossy.  He gave
me the impression of being a smartly-dressed man--smart boots and
gloves and that sort of thing--you know the general impression you get
at a uick glance.  ut as to his features, I cant tell you anything."

"Why not?" asked the coroner.

"ecause, to begin with, he wore an unusually large pair of blue
spectacles, which completely veiled his eyes, and to end with, his
throat and chin were swathed in a heavy white muffler, which covered
the lower part of his face as well.  etween the rim of his hat and the
collar of his coat it was all muffler and spectacles"

The coroner looked disappointed.  His interest in the witness seemed to
evaporate.

"id you notice anything else?" he asked.

"Only that the new-comer took Hannafords arm and that they walked away
towards the left-hand entrance hall, evidently in earnest conversation.
That was the last I saw of them."

"Theres just one uestion I should like to put to you in conclusion,"
said the coroner.  "ou say that you are confident that the photograph
in the newspapers is that of the man you saw at ictoria.  ow, have
you seen the dead mans body?"

"I have.  The police took me to see it when I volunteered my evidence."

"And you recognised it as that of the man you saw?"

"Without doubt  There is no uestion of that in my mind."

ive minutes later the inuest stood adjourned, and those chiefly
concerned gathered together in the emptying court to discuss the
voluntary witnesss evidence.  atherfield manifested an almost
cheerful optimism.

"This is better--much better," he declared, rubbing his hands as if in
anticipation of laying them on something.  "We know now that Hannaford
met, at any rate, two men that night.  Its easier to find two men than
one"

hona, whom Hetherwick had escorted to the coroners court, looked her
astonishment.  "How can that be?" she asked.

"r. Hetherwick understands," answered atherfield with a laugh.
"Hell tell you."

ut Hetherwick said nothing.  He was always wondering--always
wondering--about the woman whose picture lay in his pocket.




HAT I

TH IAO A

The conviction that there was more than met the eye in Hannafords
cutting out and putting away the handsome and distinguished womans
photograph grew mightily in Hetherwicks mind during the net few days.
He recalled all that Hannaford had said about it in the train in those
few short minutes before his sudden death.  Why had he been so keen
about showing it to the other man?  Was he taking the other man
specially to his hotel to show it to him--at that time of night?  Why
did the recollections which his possession of it brought up afford
him--obviously--so much interest and, it seemed, amusement?  And what,
eactly, was meant by the pencilled words in the margin of the
cutting?--Through my hands ten years ago  nder what circumstances
had this woman been through Hannafords hands?  And who was she?  The
more he thought of it, the more Hetherwick was convinced that there was
more importance in this matter than the police attached to it.  They
had proved utterly indifferent to Hetherwicks account of the
conversation in the train--that, said atherfield, with official
superiority, was nothing but a bit of chat, reminiscence, recollection,
on the e-superintendents part old men, he said, were fond of talking
about incidents of the past.  The only significance atherfield saw in
it was that it seemed to argue that whoever the man who had disappeared
was, he and Hannaford had known each other ten years ago.

At the end of a week the police had heard nothing of this man.  or had
they made any discovery in respect of the other man whom edbitter
swore he had seen with Hannaford at ictoria.  The best cotland ard
hands had been hard and continuously at work, and had brought nothing
to light.  Only one person had seen the first man after he darted up
the stairs of haring ross calling out that he was going for a doctor
this was a policeman on duty at the front of the nderground tation.
He had seen the man run out had watched him run at top speed up
illiers treet, and had thought no more of it than that he was some
belated passenger hurrying to catch a last bus in the trand.  ut with
that, all news and trace of him vanished.  Of the tall man in the big
blue spectacles and white muffler there never was any trace, nor any
news beyond edbitters.  et edbitter was a thoroughly dependable
witness, and there was no doubt that he had seen Hannaford in this
mans company.  o, without uestion, Hannaford, during his last few
hours of life, had been with two men--neither of whom could be found.
Within twenty-four hours of his death several men came forward
voluntarily who had had dealings or conversation with Hannaford since
his arrival in ondon.  ut there was a significant fact about the news
which any of them could give--not one knew anything of the tall man
seen by edbitter, or of the shabby man seen by Hetherwick, or of the
secret which Hannaford carried in his sealed packet.  The story of that
sealed packet had been told plentifully in the newspapers--but nobody
came forward who knew anything about it.  And when a week had elapsed
after the e-uperintendents burial, the whole mystery of his
undoubted murder seemed likely to become one of the many which are
never solved.

ut Hetherwick was becoming absorbed in this affair into which he had
been so curiously thrown head-first.  He had leisure on his hands
also, he was well off in this worlds goods, and much more concerned
with the psychology of his profession than with a desire to earn money
by its practice.  rom the moment in which he heard that the doctors
had found that Hannaford had been poisoned, he felt that here was a
murder mystery at the bottom of which he must get--it fascinated him.
And all through his speculations and theorisings about it, he was
obsessed by the picture in his pocket.  Who was that woman--and what
did the dead man remember about her?

uddenly, one morning, after a visit from atherfield, who looked in at
his chambers casually, to tell him that the police had discovered
nothing, Hetherwick put on his hat and went round to urrey treet.  He
found hona Hannaford busy in preparing to leave alters Hotel she was
going to live, for a time at any rate, with rs. eeley.  Hetherwick
went straight to the matter that had brought him.

"That print of a womans photograph which your grandfather had in his
pocket-book," he said, "and thats now in mine.  Out of what paper did
he cut it?--a newspaper, evidently."

"es, but I dont know what paper," answered hona.  "All I know is
that it was a paper which he got by post, the morning that he left
ellithwaite.  We were just leaving for the station when the post came.
He put his letters and papers--there were several things--in his
overcoat pocket, and opened them in the train.  It was somewhere on the
way to ondon that he cut out that picture.  He threw the paper
away--with others.  He had a habit of buying a lot of papers, and used
to cut out paragraphs."

"Well--I suppose it can be traced," muttered Hetherwick, thinking
aloud.  He glanced at the evidences of honas departure.  "o youre
going to live with your aunt?" he said.

"or a time--yes," she answered.

"I hope youll let me call?" suggested Hetherwick.  "Im awfully
interested in this affair, and I may be able to tell you something
about it."

"Wed be pleased," she replied.  "Ill give you the address.  I dont
intend to be idle though--unless you call in the evening, youll
probably find me out."

"What are you thinking of doing?" he asked.

"I think of going in for secretarial work," she answered.  "As a matter
of fact, I had a training for that, in ellithwaite.  Typewriting,
correspondence, accounts, rench, erman--Im pretty well euipped."

"ont think me inuisitive," said Hetherwick, suddenly.  "I hope your
grandfather hasnt forgotten you in his will--I heard hed left one"

"Thank you," replied hona.  "He hasnt.  He left me everything.  Ive
got about three hundred a year--rather more.  ut thats no reason why
I should sit down, and do nothing, is it?"

"ood" said Hetherwick.  "ut--if that sealed packet could be found?
What was worth a hundred thousand to him, would be worth a hundred
thousand to his sole legatee.  Worth finding"

"I wonder if anything will be found?" she answered.  "The whole things
a mystery that Im not even on the edge of solving."

"Time" said Hetherwick.  "And--patience."

He went away presently, and strolled round to rick ourt, where
enthwaite had his chambers.

"oing anything?" he asked, as he walked in.

"othing," replied enthwaite.  "o ahead"

Hetherwick sat down, and lighted his pipe.

"ou know ellithwaite, dont you?" he asked when he had got his
tobacco well going.  "our town, eh?"

"orn and bred there, and engaged to a girl there," replied enthwaite.
"Ought to  What about ellithwaite?"

"Were you there ten years ago?" demanded Hetherwick.

"Ten years ago?  o--ecept in the holidays.  I was at school ten years
ago.  Why?"

"o you remember any police case at ellithwaite about that time in
which a very handsome woman was concerned--probably as defendant?"

"o  ut I was more interested in cricket than in crime, in those
days.  Are you thinking about the woman Hannaford spoke of in the train
to the chap they cant come across?"

"I am  eems to me theres more in that than the police think."

"houldnt wonder.  ets see Hannaford spoke of that woman as--what?"

"aid shed been through his hands, ten years ago."

"Well, thats easy  If she was through Hannafords hands, as
uperintendent of olice, ten years ago, that would be at ellithwaite.
And therell be records, particulars, and so on at ellithwaite."

Hetherwick nodded, and smoked in silence for awhile.

"Think I shall go down there," he said at last.

enthwaite stared, wonderingly.

"een as all that" he eclaimed.

"ueer business" said Hetherwick.  "ike to solve it."

"Oh, well, its only a four hours run from ings ross," observed
enthwaite.  "Interesting town, too.  Old as the hills and modern as
they make em.  cellent hotel--White ear.  And Ill tell you what,
my futures brother is a solicitor there--ichael Hollis.  Ill give
you a letter of introduction to him, and hell show you round and give
you any help you need."

"ood man" said Hetherwick.  "Write it"

enthwaite sat down and wrote, and handed over the result.

"What do you want to find out, eactly?" he asked, as Hetherwick
thanked him, and rose to go.

"All about the woman, and why Hannaford cut her picture out of the
paper," answered Hetherwick.  "Well--see you when I get back."

He went off to his own chambers, packed a bag, and drove to ings
ross to catch the early afternoon train for the orth.  At half-past
seven that evening he found himself in ellithwaite, a grey,
smoke-laden town set in the midst of bleak and rugged hills, where the
folk--if the railway officials were anything to go by--spoke a dialect
which, to Hetherwicks southern ears, sounded like some barbaric
language.  ut the "White ear," in which he was presently installed,
yielded all the comforts and luuries of a first-class hotel the
dining-room, into which Hetherwick turned as soon as he had booked his
room, seemed to be thronged by a thoroughly cosmopolitan crowd of men
he heard most of the principal uropean languages being spoken--later,
he found that his fellow-guests were principally ontinental business
men, buyers, intent on replenishing ehausted stocks from the great
warehouses and manufactories of ellithwaite.  All this was
interesting, nor was he destined to spend the remainder of his evening
in contemplating it from a solitary corner, for he had scarcely eaten
his dinner when a hall-porter came to tell him that r. Hollis was
asking for r. Hetherwick.

Hetherwick hastened into the lounge, and found a keen-faced,
friendly-eyed man of forty or thereabouts stretching out a hand to him.

"enthwaite wired me this afternoon that you were coming down, and
asked me to look you up here," he said.  "Id have asked you to dine
with me, but Ive been kept at my office until just now, and again, I
live a good many miles out of town.  ut to-morrow night----"

"oure awfully good," replied Hetherwick.  "Id no idea that
enthwaite was wiring.  He gave me a letter of introduction to you, but
I suppose he thought I wanted to lose no time.  And I dont, and I dare
say you can tell me something about the object of my visit--lets find
a corner and smoke."

Installed in an alcove in the big smoking-room, Hollis read
enthwaites letter.

"What is it youre after?" he asked.  "enthwaite mentions that my
knowledge of ellithwaite is deeper than his own--naturally, it is, as
Im several years older."

"Well," responded Hetherwick.  "Its this, briefly.  oure aware, of
course, of what befell your late olice-uperintendent in ondon--his
sudden death?"

"Oh, yes--read all the newspapers, anyway," assented Hollis.  "oure
the man who was present in the train on the nderground, arent you?"

"I am.  And thats one reason why Im keen on solving the mystery.
Theres no doubt whatever that Hannaford was poisoned--that its a case
of deliberate murder.  ow, theres a feature of the case to which the
police dont seem to attach any importance.  I do attach great
importance to it.  Its the matter of the woman to whom Hannaford
referred when he was talking--in my presence--to the man who so
mysteriously disappeared.  Hannaford spoke of that woman as having been
through his hands ten years ago.  That would be some eperience he had
here, in this town.  ow then, do you know anything about it?  oes it
arouse any recollection?"

Hollis, who was smoking a cigar, thoughtfully tapped its long ash
against the edge of his coffee-cup.  uddenly his eyes brightened.

"Thats probably the Whittingham case," he said.  "It was about ten
years ago."

"And what was the Whittingham case?" asked Hetherwick.  "ase of a
woman?"

"Of a woman--evidently an adventuress--who came to ellithwaite about
ten years ago, and stayed here some little time, in this very hotel,"
replied Hollis.  "Oddly enough, I never saw her  ut she was heard of
enough--eventually.  he came here, to the White ear, alone, with
plenty of luggage and evident funds.  I understand she was a very
handsome woman, twenty-eight or thirty years of age, and she was taken
for somebody of conseuence.  I rather think she described herself as
the Honourable rs. Whittingham.  he paid her bills here with
unfailing punctuality every aturday morning.  he spent a good deal of
money amongst the leading tradesmen in the town, and always paid cash.
In short, she established her credit very successfully.  And with
nobody more so than the principal jeweller here--alladale.  he bought
a lot of jewellery from alladale--but in his case, she always paid by
cheue.  And in the end it was through a deal with alladale that she
got into trouble."

"And into Hannafords hands" suggested Hetherwick.

"Into Hannafords hands, certainly," assented Hollis.  "It was this
way.  he had, as I said just now, made a lot of purchases from
alladale, who, I may tell you, has a first-class trade amongst our
rich commercial magnates in this neighbourhood.  Her transactions with
him, however, were never, at first, in amounts eceeding a hundred or
two.  ut they went through all right.  he used to pay him by cheue
drawn on a anchester bank--anchester, you know, is only thirty-five
miles away.  As her first cheues were always met, alladale never
bothered about making any inuiry about her financial stability like
everybody else he was very much impressed by her.  Well, in the end,
shed a big deal with alladale, alladale had a very fine diamond
necklace in stock.  He and she used to discuss her acuisition of it
according to his story they had a fine old battle as to terms.
ventually, they struck a bargain--he let her have it for three
thousand nine hundred pounds.  he gave him a cheue for that amount
there and then, and he let her carry off the necklace."

"Oh" eclaimed Hetherwick.

"ust so" agreed Hollis.  "ut--he did.  However, for some reason or
other, alladale had that cheue specially cleared.  he handed it to
him on a onday afternoon first thing on Wednesday morning alladale
found that it had been returned with the ominous reference to drawer
inscribed on its surface  aturally, he hurried round to the White
ear.  ut the Honourable rs. Whittingham had disappeared.  he had
paid up her account, taken her belongings, and left the hotel, and the
town, late on the onday evening, and all that could be discovered at
the station was that she had travelled by the last train to eeds,
where, of course, there are several big main lines to all parts of
ngland.  And she had left no address she had, indeed, told the people
here that she should be back before long, and that if any letters came
they were to keep them until her return.  o then alladale went to the
police, and Hannaford got busy."

"I gather that he traced her?" suggested Hetherwick.

Hollis laughed sardonically.

"Hannaford traced her--and he got her," he answered.  "ut he might
well use the epression that you mentioned just now.  he was indeed
through his hands--just as a particularly slippery eel might have
been--she got clear away from him."




HAT 

TH OI T

Hetherwick now began to arrive at something like an understanding of a
matter that had puled him ever since and also at the time of the
conversation between Hannaford and his companion in the train.  He had
noted then that whatever it was that Hannaford was telling, he was
telling it as a man tells a story against himself there had been signs
of amused chagrin and discomfiture in his manner.  ow he saw why.

"Ah" he eclaimed.  "he was one too many for him.  Then?"

"A good many times too many" laughed Hollis.  "he did Hannaford
completely.  He strove hard to find her, and did a great deal of the
spade-work himself.  And at last he ran her down--in a fashionable
hotel in ondon.  He had a cotland ard man with him, and a detective
from our own police-office here, a man named andham, who is still in
the force--Ill introduce you to him to-morrow.  Hannaford, finding
that rs. Whittingham had a suite of rooms in this hotel--a big West
nd place--left his two men downstairs, or outside, and went up to see
her alone.  According to his own account, she was highly indignant at
any suspicions being cast upon her, and still more so, rose to a pitch
of most virtuous indignation when he told her that hed got a warrant
for her arrest and that shed have to go with him.  uring a brief
interchange of remarks she declared that if her bankers at anchester
had returned her cheue unpaid it must have been merely because they
hadnt realised certain valuable securities which shed sent to them,
and that if alladale had presented his cheue a few days later it
would have been all right.  ow, that was all bosh--Hannaford, of
course, had been in communication with the bankers all they knew of
the lady was that she had opened an account with them while staying at
some hotel in anchester, and that she had drawn all but a few pounds
of her balance the very day on which she had got the necklace from
alladale and fled with it from ellithwaite.  aturally, Hannaford
didnt tell her this--he merely reiterated his demand that she should
go with him.  he assented at once, only stipulating that there should
be no fuss--she would walk out of the hotel with him, and he and his
satellites could come back and search her belongings at their leisure.
Then Hannaford--who, between you and me, Hetherwick, had an eye for a
pretty woman--made his mistake.  Her bedroom opened out of the
sitting-room in which hed had his interview with her he was fool
enough to let her go into it alone, to get ready to go with him.  he
went--and that was the very last Hannaford ever saw of her"

"ade a lightning eit, eh?" remarked Hetherwick.

"he must have gone instantly," asserted Hollis.  "A door opened from
the bedroom into a corridor--she must have picked up hat and coat and
walked straight away, leaving everything she had there.  Anyway, when
Hannaford, tired of waiting, knocked at the door and looked in, his
bird was flown.  Then, of course, there was a hue-and-cry, and a fine
revelation.  ut shed got clear away, probably by some side door or
other eit, and although Hannaford, according to his own account, raked
ondon with a comb for her, she was never found.  anished"

"And the necklace?" inuired Hetherwick.

"That had vanished too," replied Hollis.  "They searched her trunks and
things, but they found nothing but clothing.  Whatever she had in the
way of money and valuables shed carried off.  And so Hannaford came
home, considerably down in the mouth, and he had to stand a good deal
of chaff.  And if he found this womans picture in a recent
paper--well, small wonder that he did cut it out  I should say he was
probably going to set cotland ard on her track--for, of course,
theres no time-limit to criminal proceedings."

"This is the picture he cut out," observed Hetherwick, producing it
from his pocket-book.  "ut you say you never saw the woman?"

"o, I never saw her," assented Hollis, eamining the print with
interested curiosity.  "o, of course, I cant recognise this.
Handsome woman  ut you meet me at my office--close by--to-morrow
morning, at ten, and Ill take you to our police-station.  andham will
know"

andham, an elderly man with a sphin-like manner and watchful eyes,
laughed sardonically when Hollis eplained Hetherwicks business.  He
laughed again when Hetherwick showed him the print.

"Oh, aye, thats the lady" he eclaimed.  "ot changed much, neither
gad, she was a smart un, that, r. Hollis--I often laugh when I
think how she did Hannaford  ut you know, Hannaford was a
soft-hearted man.  At these little affairs, he was always for sparing
peoples feelings.  All very well--but he had to pay for trying to
spare hers  Aye, thats her  We have a portrait of her here, you
know."

"ou have, eh?" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "I should like to see it."

"ou can see it with pleasure, sir," replied the detective.  "And look
at it as long as you like."  He turned to a desk close by and produced
a big album, full of portraits with written particulars beneath them.
"This is not, strictly speaking, a police photo," he continued.  "Its
not one that we took ourselves, ye understand--we never had the chance
o--but when my lady was staying at the White ear, she had her
portrait taken by Wintring, the photographer, in ilver treet, and
Wintring was that suited with it that he put it in his window.  o, of
course, when her ladyship popped off with alladales necklace, we got
one of those portraits, and added it to our little collection.  Here it
is--and youll not notice so much difference between it and that
youve got in your hand, sir."

There was very little difference between the two photographs, and
Hetherwick said so.  And presently he went away from the police-office
wondering more than ever about the woman with whose past adventures he
was concerning himself.

"ay as well do the thing thoroughly while youre about it," remarked
Hollis, as they walked off.  "ome and see alladale--his shop is only
round the corner.  ot that he can tell you much more than Ive told
you already."

ut alladale proved himself able to tell a great deal more.  A grave,
elderly man, presiding over an establishment which Hetherwick,
unaccustomed to the opulence of provincial manufacturing towns, was
astonished to find outside ondon, he ushered his visitor into a
private room, and listened to the reasons they gave for calling on him.
After a close and careful inspection of the print which Hetherwick put
before him, he handed it back with a confident nod.

"There is no doubt whatever--in my mind--that that is a print from a
photograph of the woman I knew as the Honourable rs. Whittingham," he
said.  "And if it has been taken recently, she has altered very little
during the ten years that have elapsed since she was here in this town."

"oud be glad to see her again, r. alladale--in the flesh?" laughed
Hollis.

The jeweller shook his head.

"I think not," he answered.  "o, I think not, r. Hollis.  Thats an
episode which I had put out of my mind--until you recalled it."

"ut--your loss?" suggested Hollis.  "lose on four thousand pounds,
wasnt it?"

r. alladale raised one of his white hands to his grey beard and
coughed.  It was a cough that suggested discretion, confidence,
secrecy.  He smiled behind his moustache, and his spectacled eyes
seemed to twinkle.

"I think I may venture a little disclosure--in the company of two
gentlemen learned in the law," he said.  "To a solicitor whom I know
very well, and to a barrister introduced by him, I think I may reveal a
little secret--between ourselves and to go no further.  The fact of
this matter is, gentlemen--I had no loss"

"What?" eclaimed Hollis.  "o--loss?"

"ventually," replied the jeweller.  "ventually  Indeed, to tell you
the truth plain, I made my profit, and--er, something over."

Hollis looked his bewilderment.

"o you mean that--eventually--you were paid?" he asked.

"recisely  ventually--after a considerable interval--I was paid,"
replied r. alladale.  "I will tell you the circumstances.  It is, I
believe, common knowledge that I sold the diamond necklace to rs.
Whittingham for three thousand, nine hundred pounds, and that the
cheue she gave me was dishonoured, and that she cleared off with the
goods and was never heard of after she escaped from Hannaford.  Well,
two years ago, that is to say, eight years after her disappearance, I
one day received a letter which bore the ew ork postmark.  It
contained a sheet of notepaper on which were a few words and a few
figures.  ut I have that now, and Ill show it to you."

oing to a safe in the corner of his parlour, the jeweller, after some
searching, produced a paper and laid it before his visitors.
Hetherwick eamined it with curiosity.  There was no name, no address,
no date all that appeared was, as alladale had remarked, a few words,
a few figures, typewritten--

  rincipal  . . . . . . . . . . ,
   years Interest   . . . .  ,
                                 ------
                                 ,

  raft , enclosed herein kindly acknowledge in
  ondon Times.


"nclosed, as is there said, was a draft on a ondon bank for the
specified amount," continued r. alladale.  ",  ou may easily
believe that at first I could scarcely understand this I knew of no
one in ew ork who owed me money.  ut the first
figures--,--threw light on the matter--I suddenly remembered rs.
Whittingham and my lost necklace.  Then I saw through the
thing--evidently rs. Whittingham had become prosperous, wealthy, and
she was honest enough to make amends there was my principal, and eight
years interest on it.  et, I felt somewhat doubtful about taking
it--I didnt know whether I mightnt be compounding a felony?  ou
gentlemen, of course, will appreciate my little difficulty?"

"m" remarked Hollis in a non-committal tone.  "The more interesting
matter is--what did you do?  Though I think we already know," he added
with a smile.

"Well, I went to see Hannaford, and told him what I had received,"
answered the jeweller.  "And Hannaford said precisely what I epected
him to say.  He said ut the money in your pocket, alladale, and say
nothing about it  o--I did"

"ach of you feeling pretty certain that rs. Whittingham was not
likely to show her face in ellithwaite again, no doubt" observed
Hollis.  "ery interesting, r. alladale.  ut it strikes me that
whether she ever comes to ellithwaite again or not, rs. Whittingham,
or whatever her name may be nowadays, is in ngland."

"ou think so?" asked the jeweller.

"Her pictures recently appeared in an nglish paper, anyway," said
Hollis.

"ut pictures of famous American ladies appear in nglish newspapers,"
suggested r. alladale.  "I have recollections of several.  ow my
notion is that rs. Whittingham, who was a very handsome and very
charming woman, eventually went across the Atlantic and married an
American millionaire  Thats how I figured it.  And I have often
wondered who she is now."

"Thats precisely what I want to find out," said Hetherwick.  "One
thing is certain--Hannaford knew  If hed been alive he could have
told us.  ecause in whatever paper it was that this print appeared
there would be some letterpress about it, giving the name, and why it
appeared at all."

"ou can trace that," remarked Hollis.

"ust so," agreed Hetherwick, "and I may as well get back to town and
begin the job.  ut I think with r. Hollis," he added, turning to the
jeweller, "I believe that the woman is here in ngland I think it
possible, too, that Hannaford knew where.  And I dont think it
impossible that between the time of his cutting out her picture from
the paper and the time of his sudden death he came in touch with her."

"ou think it probable that she, in some way, had something to do with
his murder--if it was murder?" asked r. alladale.

"I think it possible," replied Hetherwick.  "There are strange features
in the case.  One of the strangest is this.  Why, when Hannaford cut
out that picture, for his own purposes, evidently with no intention of
showing it to anyone else, did he cut it out without the name and
letterpress which must have been under and over it?"

"ueer, certainly" said Hollis.  "ut, you know, you can soon
ascertain what that name was.  All youve got to do is to get another
copy of the paper."

"nfortunately, Hannafords granddaughter doesnt know what particular
paper it was," replied Hetherwick.  "Her sole recollection of it is
that it was some local newspaper, sent to Hannaford by post, the very
morning that he left here for ondon."

"till--it can be traced," said Hollis.  "It was in some paper---and
therell be other copies."

resently he and Hetherwick left the jewellers shop.  Outside, Hollis
led his companion across the street, and turned into a narrow alley.

"Ill show you a man wholl remember rs. Whittingham better than
anybody in ellithwaite," he said, with a laugh.  "etter even than
alladale.  I told you she stayed at the White ear when she was
here?  Well, since then the entire staff of that eminent hostelry has
been changed, from the manager to the boots--I dont think theres a
man or woman there who was there ten years ago.  ut theres a man at
the end of this passage who was formerly hall-porter at the White
ear--Amblet Hudson--and who now keeps a rather cosy little saloon-bar
down here well drop in on him.  Hes what we call a bit of a
character, and if you can get him to talk, hes usually worth listening
to."




HAT I

A O I

Hollis led the way farther along the alley, between high, black,
windowless walls, and suddenly turning into a little court, paused
before a door set deep in the side of an old half-timbered house.

"ueer old place, this" he remarked over his shoulder.  "ut youll
get a glass of as good port or sherry from this chap as youd get
anywhere in ngland--he knows his customers  ome in."

He led the way into a place the like of which Hetherwick had never
seen--a snug, cosy room, panelled and raftered in old oak, with a
bright fire burning in an open hearth and the flicker of its flames
dancing on the old brass and pewter that ornamented the walls.  There
was a small bar-counter on one side of it and behind this, in his
shirt-sleeves, and with a cigar protruding from the corner of a pair of
clean-shaven, humorous lips, stood a keen-eyed man, busily engaged in
polishing wine-glasses.

"ood morning, gentlemen" he said heartily.  "ice morning, r.
Hollis, for the time o year.  And what can I do for you and your
friend, sir?"

Hollis glanced round the room--empty, save for themselves.  He drew a
stool to the bar and motioned Hetherwick to follow his eample.

"I think well try your very ecellent dry sherry, Hudson," he
answered.  "That is, if its as good as it was last time I tasted it."

"Always up to standard, r. Hollis, always up to standard, sir"
replied the bar-keeper.  "o inferior ualities, no substitutes, and no
trading on past reputation in this establishment, gentlemen  As good a
glass of dry sherry here, sir, as youd get where sherry wine comes
from--and you cant say that of most places in ngland, I think.
verythings of the best here, r. Hollis--as you know"

Hollis responded with a little light chaff suddenly he bent across the
bar.

"Hudson" he said confidentially.  "y friend here has something hed
like to show you.  ow, then," he continued, as Hetherwick, in response
to this, had produced the picture, "do you recognise that?"

The bar-keeper put on a pair of spectacles and turned the picture to
the light, eamining it closely.  His lips tightened then relaed in a
cynical smile.

"Aye" he said, half carelessly.  "Its the woman that did old
alladale out of that diamond necklace.  Of course--istress
Whittingham"

"Would you know her again, if you met her--now?" asked Hollis.

The bar-keeper picked up one of his glasses and began a vigorous
polishing.

"Aye" he answered, laconically.  "And I should know her by something
else than her face"

ust then two men came in, and Hudson broke off to attend to their
wants.  ut presently they carried their glasses away to a snug corner
near the fire, and the bar-keeper once more turned to Hollis and
Hetherwick.

"Aye" he said confidentially.  "If need were, I could tell that party
by something else than her face, handsome as that is  I used to tell
Hannaford when he was busy trying to find her that if hed any
difficulty about making certain, I could identify her if nobody else
could  ou see, I saw a deal of her when she was stopping at the
White ear.  And I knew something that nobody else knew."

"What is it?" asked Hetherwick.

Hudson leaned closer across the counter and lowered his voice.

"he was a big, handsome woman, this rs. Whittingham," he continued.
"ery showy, dressy woman fond of fine clothes and jewellery, and so
on sort of woman, you know, that would attract attention anywhere.
And one of these women, too, that was evidently used to being waited on
hand and foot--she took her moneys worth out of the White ear, I
can tell you  I did a deal for her, one way or another, and Ill say
this for her she was free enough with her money.  If it so happened
that she wanted things doing for her, she kept you fairly on the go
till they were done, but she threw five-shilling pieces and half-crowns
about as if they were farthings  hed send you to take a sipenny
telegram and give you a couple of shillings for taking it.  Well, now,
as I say, I saw a deal of her, one way and another, getting cabs for
her, and taking things up to her room, and doing this, that, and
tother.  And it was with going up there one day sudden-like, with a
telegram that had just come, that I found out something about
her--something that, as I say, I could have told her by anywhere, even
if she could have changed her face and put a wig on"

"Aye--and what, now?" asked Hollis.

"This" answered Hudson with a knowing look.  "aybe Im a noticing
sort of chap--anyhow, there was a thing I always noticed about rs.
Whittingham.  Wherever she was, and no matter how she was dressed,
whether it was in her going-out things or her dinner finery, she always
wore a band of black velvet round her right forearm, just above the
wrist, where women wear bracelets.  In fact, it was a sort of bracelet,
a strip, as I say, of black velvet, happen about two inches wide, and
on the front a cameo ornament, the sie of a shilling, white stone or
something of that sort, with one of these heathen figures carved on it.
There were other folk about the place noticed that black velvet band,
too--I tell you she was never seen without it the chambermaids said
she slept with it on.  ut on the occasion Im telling you about, when
I went up to her room with a telegram, I caught her without it.  he
opened her door to see who knocked--she was in a dressing-gown, going
to change for dinner, I reckon, and she held out her right hand for
what Id brought her.  The black velvet band wasnt on it, and for just
a second like I saw what was on her arm"

"es?" said Hollis.  "omething--remarkable?"

"or a lady--aye" replied Hudson, with a grim laugh.  "Her arm was
tattooed  ight round the place where she always wore this black
velvet band there was a snake, red and green, and yellow, and blue,
with its tail in its mouth--wonderfully done, too it had been no
novice that had done that bit of work, I can tell you  Of course, I
just saw it, and no more, but there was a strong electric light close
by, and I did see it, and saw it plain and all.  And thats a thing
that that woman, whoever she may be, and wherever shes got to, can
never rub off, nor scrub off--shell carry that to the day of her
death."

The two listeners looked at each other.

"Odd" remarked Hollis.

Hetherwick turned to the bar-keeper.

"id she notice that you saw that her arm was tattooed?" he asked.

"ay, I dont think she did," replied Hudson.  "Of course, the thing
was over in a second.  I made no sign that Id seen aught particular,
and she said nought.  ut--I saw"

ust then other customers came in, and the bar-keeper turned away to
attend to their wants.  Hollis and Hetherwick moved from the counter to
one of the snug corners at the farther end of the room.

"Whoever she may be, wherever she may be--as Hudson said just now,"
remarked Hollis, "and if this woman really had anything to do with the
mysterious circumstances of Hannafords death, she ought not to be
difficult to find.  A woman who carries an indefaceable mark like that
on her arm, and whose picture has recently appeared in a newspaper,
should easily be traced."

"I think I shall get at her through the picture," agreed Hetherwick.
"The newspaper production seems to have been done from a photograph
which, from its clearness and finish, was probably taken by some
first-class firm in ondon.  I shall go round such firms as soon as I
get back.  It may be, of course, that shes nothing whatever to do with
Hannafords murder, but still, its a trail thats got to be followed
to the end now that ones started out on it.  Well that seems to
finish my business here--as far as shes concerned.  ut theres
another matter--I told you that when Hannaford came to town he had on
him a sealed packet containing the secret of some invention or
discovery, and that its strangely and unaccountably missing.  His
granddaughter says that he worked this thing out--whatever it is--in a
laboratory that he had in his garden.  ow then, before I go I want to
see that laboratory.  As hes only recently left the place, I suppose
things will still be pretty much as he left them at his old house.
Where did he live?"

"He lived on the outskirts of the town," replied Hollis.  "An
old-fashioned house that he bought some years ago--I know it by sight
well enough, though Ive never been in it.  I dont suppose its let
yet, though I know its being advertised in the local papers.  ets
get some lunch at the White ear, and then well drive up there and
see what we can do.  ou want to get an idea of what it was that
Hannaford had invented?"

"ust so," assented Hetherwick.  "If the secret was worth all that he
told his granddaughter it was, he may have been murdered by somebody
who wanted to get sole possession of it.  Anyway, its another trail
thats got to be worked on."

"I never heard of Hannaford as an inventor or eperimenter," remarked
Hollis.  "ut there, I knew little about him, ecept in his official
capacity he and his granddaughter, and an elderly woman they kept as a
working housekeeper, were uiet sort of folk.  I knew that he brought
up his granddaughter from infancy, and gave her a rattling good
education at the irls High chool, but beyond that, I know little of
their private affairs.  I suppose he amused himself in this laboratory
you speak of in his spare time?"

"abbled in chemistry, I understand," said Hetherwick.  "And, if it
hasnt been dismantled, we may find something in that laboratory that
will give us a clue of some sort."

Hollis seemed to reflect for a minute or two.

"Ive an idea" he said suddenly.  "Theres a man who lunches at the
White ear every day--a man named ollison hes analytical chemist
to a big firm of dyers in the town.  Ive seen him in conversation with
Hannaford now and then.  erhaps he could tell us something on this
point.  ome on  this is just about his time for lunch."

A few minutes later, in the coffee-room of the hotel, Hollis led
Hetherwick up to a bearded and spectacled man who had just sat down to
lunch, and having introduced him, briefly detailed the object of his
visit to ellithwaite.  ollison nodded and smiled.

"I understand," he said, as they seated themselves at his table.
"Hannaford did dabble a bit in chemistry--in uite an amateur way.  ut
as to inventing anything that was worth all that--come  till, he was
an ingenious man, for an amateur, and he may have hit on something
fairly valuable."

"ouve no idea what he was after?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Of late, no  ut some time ago he was immensely interested in aniline
dyes," replied ollison.  "He used to talk to me about them.  Thats a
subject of infinite importance in this district.  Of course, as I dare
say you know, the ermans have been vastly ahead of us as regards
aniline dyes, and weve got most, if not all, of the stuff used, from
ermany.  Hannaford used to worry himself as to why we couldnt make
our own aniline dyes, and I believe he eperimented.  ut, with his
resources, as an amateur, of course, that was hopeless."

"Ive sometimes seen him talking to you," observed Hollis.  "ouve no
idea what he was after, of late?"

"o.  He used to ask me technical uestions," answered ollison.  "ou
know, I just regarded him as a man who had a natural taste for
eperimenting with things.  This was evidently his hobby.  I used to
chaff him about it.  till, he was a purposeful man, and by reading and
eperiment hed picked up a lot of knowledge."

"And, I suppose, its within the bounds of possibility that he had hit
on something of practical value?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Oh, uite within such bounds--and he may have done," agreed ollison.
"Ive known of much greater amateurs suddenly discovering something.
The uestion then is--do they know enough to turn their discovery to
any practical purpose and account?"

"vidently, from what he told his granddaughter, Hannaford did think he
knew enough," said Hetherwick.  "What I want to find out from a visit
to his old laboratory is--what had he discovered?"

"And as youre not a chemist, nor even a dabbler," remarked Hollis,
with a laugh, "that wont be easy  oud better come with us after
lunch, ollison."

"I can give you a couple of hours," assented ollison.  "Im already
curious--especially if any discovery we can make tends to throw light
on the mystery of Hannafords death.  ity the police havent got hold
of the man who was with him," he added, glancing at Hetherwick.  "I
suppose you could identify him?"

"nless hes an absolute adept at disguising himself, yes--positively"
replied Hetherwick.  "He was a noticeable man."

An hour later the three men drove up to a house which stood a little
way out of the town, on the edge of the moorland that stretched towards
the great range of hills on the west.  The house, an old-fashioned,
solitary place, was empty, save for a caretaker who had been installed
in its back rooms to keep it aired and to show it to possible tenants.
The laboratory, a stone-walled, timber-roofed shed at the end of the
garden, had never been opened, said the caretaker, since r. Hannaford
locked it up and left it.  ut the key was speedily forthcoming, and
the three visitors entered and looked round, each with different
valuings of what he saw.

The whole place was a wilderness of litter and untidiness.  Whatever
Hannaford had possessed in the way of laboratory plant and appliances
had been removed, and now there was little but rubbish--glass, whole
and broken, paper, derelict boes and crates, odds and ends of
wreckage--to look at.  ut the analytical chemist glanced about him
with a knowing eye, eamining bottles and boes, picking up a thing
here and another there, and before long he turned to his companions
with a laugh, pointing at the same time to a table in a corner which
was covered with and dust-lined pots.

"Its very easy to see what Hannaford was after" he said.  "Hes been
trying to evolve a new ink"

"Ink" eclaimed Hollis incredulously.  "Arent there plenty of inks on
the market?"

"o end" agreed ollison with another laugh, and again pointing to the
table.  "These are specimens of all the better-known ones--ritish, of
course, for no really decent ink is made elsewhere.  ut even the very
best ink, up to now, isnt perfect.  Hannaford perhaps thought, being
an amateur, that he could make a better than the known best.
Ink--thats what hes been after.  A superior, perfectly-fluid,
penetrating, permanent, non-corrosive writing-ink--thats been his
notion, a thousand to one  I observe the presence of lots of stuffs
that hes used."

He showed them various things, eplaining their properties and adding
some remarks on the history of the manufacture of writing-inks during
the last hundred years.

"Taking it altogether," he concluded, "and in spite of manufacturers
advertisements and boasting, there isnt a really absolutely perfect
writing-fluid on the market--that I know of, anyway.  If Hannaford
thought he could make one, and succeeded, well, Id be glad to have his
formula  oney in it"

"To the etent of a hundred thousand pounds?" asked Hetherwick,
remembering what hona had told him.  "All that?"

"Oh, well" laughed ollison, "you must remember that inventors are
always very sanguine always apt to see everything through
rose-coloured spectacles invariably prone to eaggerate the merits of
their inventions.  ut if Hannaford, by eperiment, really hit on a
first-class formula for making a writing-ink superior in all the
necessary ualities to its rivals--yes, thered be a pot of money in
it.  o doubt of that"

"I suppose hed have to take out a patent for his invention?" suggested
Hetherwick.

"Oh, to be sure  I should think that was one of his reasons for going
to ondon--to see after it." assented ollison.  He looked round again,
and again laughed.  "Well," he said, "I think you know now--you may be
confident about it from what Ive seen here--what Hannaford was after
Ink--just ink"

Hetherwick accepted this judgment, and when he left ellithwaite later
in the afternoon on his return journey to ondon, he summed up the
results of his visit.  They were two.  irst, he had discovered that
the woman of whom Hannaford had spoken in the train was a person who
ten years before had been known as rs. Whittingham, appeared to be
some sort of an adventuress, and, in spite of her restitution to the
jeweller whom she had defrauded, was still liable to arrest,
conviction, and punishment--if she could be found.  econd, he had
found out that the precious invention of which Hannaford had spoken so
confidently and enthusiastically to his granddaughter and the
particulars of which had mysteriously disappeared, related to the
manufacture of a new writing-ink, which might, in truth, prove a very
valuable commercial asset.  o far, so good he was finding things out.
As he ate his dinner in the restaurant car he considered his net
steps.  ut it needed little consideration to resolve on them.  He must
find out all about the woman whose picture lay in his pocketbook--what
she now called herself where she was how her photograph came to be
reproduced in a newspaper and, last, but far from least, if Hannaford,
after seeing the reproduction, had got into touch with her or given
information about her.  To the man in the train Hannaford had remarked
that he had said nothing about her until that evening--yes, but was
that man the only man to whom he had spoken?  o much for that--and the
net thing was to find out somehow what had become of the sealed packet
which Hannaford undoubtedly had on him when he went out of alters
Hotel on the night of his death.




HAT II

A T

et morning, and before calling on either enthwaite or hona
Hannaford, Hetherwick set out on a tour of the fashionable
photographers in the West nd of ondon.  After all, there were not so
many of them, so many at any rate of the very famous ones.  He made a
hit and began to work methodically.  His first few coverts were drawn
blank, but just before noon, and as he was thinking of knocking off for
lunch, he started his fo.  In a palatial establishment in ond treet
the person to whom he applied, showing his picture, gave an immediate
smile of recognition.

"ou want to know who is the original of this?" he said.  "ertainly
ady iversreade, of iversreade ourt, near orking."

Hetherwick had no deep acuaintance with ebrett nor with urke, nor
even with the list of peers, baronets and knights given in the ordinary
reference books, and to him the name of ady iversreade was absolutely
unknown--he had never heard of her.  ut the man to whom he had shown
the print, and who now held it in his hand, seemed to consider that
ady iversreade was, or should be, as well known to everybody as she
evidently was to him.

"This print is from one of our photographs of ady iversreade," he
said, turning to a side table in the reception-room in which they were
standing and picking up a framed portrait.  "This one."

"Then you probably know in what newspaper this print appeared?"
suggested Hetherwick.  "Thats really what Im desirous of finding out."

"Oh, it appeared in several," answered the photographer.  "ecently.
It was about the time that ady iversreade opened some home or
institute--I forget what.  There was an account of it in the papers,
and naturally her portrait was reproduced."

Hetherwick made a plausible prearranged ecuse for his curiosity, and
went away.  ady iversreade--evidently some woman of rank, or means,
or position.  ut was she identical with the rs. Whittingham of ten
years ago--the rs. Whittingham who did the ellithwaite jeweller out
of a necklace worth nearly four thousand pounds and cleverly escaped
arrest at the hands of Hannaford?  And if so...

ut that led to indefinite vistas the main thing at present was to
find out all that could be found out about ady iversreade, of
iversreade ourt, near orking.  Hetherwick could doubtless have
obtained considerable information from the fashionable photographer,
but he had carefully refrained from showing too much inuisitiveness.
oreover, he knew a man, one oley, a fellow club-member, who was
always fully posted up in all the doings of the social and fashionable
world and could, if he would, tell him everything about ady
iversreade--that was, if there was anything to tell about her.  oley
was one of those bachelor men about town who went everywhere, knew
everybody, and kept himself fully informed he invariably lunched at
this particular club, the unior egatherium, and thither Hetherwick
presently proceeded, bent on finding him.

He was fortunate in running oley to earth almost as soon as he
entered the sacred and eclusive portals.  oley was lunching and
there was no one else at his table.  Hetherwick joined him, and began
the usual small talk about nothing in particular.  ut he soon came to
his one point.

"ook here" he said, at a convenient interval.  "I want to ask you
something.  ou know everybody and everything.  Who is ady
iversreade, whos recently opened some home or institution, or
hospital or something?"

"One of the richest women in ngland" replied oley promptly.  "Worth
a couple of millions or so.  Thats who she is--who she was, I dont
know.  ont suppose anybody else does, either.  In this country,
anyhow."

"What, is she a foreigner, then?" asked Hetherwick.  "Ive seen her
portrait in the papers--thats why I asked you who she is.  oesnt
look foreign, I think."

"I can tell you all that is known about her," said oley, "and thats
not much.  hes the widow of old ir ohn iversreade, the famous
contractor--the man who made a pot of money building railways, and dams
across big rivers, and that sort of thing, and got a knighthood for it.
He also built himself a magnificent place near orking, and called it
iversreade ourt--just the type of place a modern millionaire would
build.  ow, old ir ohn had been a bachelor all his life, until he
was over sity--no time for anything but his contracts, you know.  ut
when he was about sity-five, which would be some si or seven years
ago, he went over to the nited tates and made a rather lengthy stay
there.  And when he returned he brought a wife with him--the lady
youre inuiring about."

"American, then?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Well, he married her over there, certainly," said oley.  "ut I
should say she isnt American."

"ouve met her--personally?"

"ust.  un across her once or twice at various affairs, and been
introduced to her, uite casually.  o, I dont think shes American.
If I wanted to label her, I should say she was cosmopolitan."

"Woman of the world, eh?"

"ecidedly so.  Handsome woman--self-possessed--self-assured--smart,
clever.  I think shell know how to take care of the money her husband
left her."

"eave her everything?"

"very penny--ecept some inconsiderable legacies to charitable
institutions.  It was said at the time--its two years since the old
chap died--that shes got over two millions."

"And this institution, or whatever it is?"

"Oh, that  That was in the papers not so long since."

"Im no great reader of newspapers.  What about it?"

"Oh, shes started a home for wounded officers near iversreade ourt.
There was some big country house near there empty--couldnt really be
sold or let.  he bought it, renovated it, fitted it up, stuck a staff
of nurses and servants in, and got it blessed by the War Office.  olly
nice place, I believe, and she pays the piper."

"oing the benevolent business, eh?"

"o it appears.  asy game, too, when youve got a couple of millions
behind you.  seful, though."

oley went away soon after that, and Hetherwick, wondering about what
he had learned, and now infinitely inuisitive about the identity of
ady iversreade with rs. Whittingham, went into the smoking-room, and
more from habit than because he really wanted to see it, picked up a
copy of The Times.  Almost the first thing on which his glance
lighted was the name that was just then in his thoughts--there it was,
in capitals, at the head of an advertisement


"A IA HO O WO OI, .--euired at
once a esident ady-ecretary, fully competent to undertake accounts
and correspondence and thoroughly trained in shorthand and typewriting
a knowledge of rench and erman would be a high recommendation.
Application should be made personally any day this week between .
and . and . and . to ady iversreade, iversreade ourt,
orking."


Hetherwick threw the paper aside, left the club, and at the first
newsagents he came to bought another copy.  With this in his hand he
jumped into a tai-cab and set off for urrey treet, wondering if he
would find hona Hannaford still at alters Hotel.  He was fortunate
in that--she had not yet left--and in a few minutes he was giving her a
full and detailed account of his doings since his last interview with
her.  he listened to his story about ellithwaite and his discoveries
of that morning with a slightly puled look.

"Why are you taking all this trouble?" she asked suddenly and abruptly.
"oure doing more, going into things more, than the police are.
atherfield was here this morning to tell me, he said, how they were
getting on.  They arent getting on at all--they havent made one
single discovery theyve heard nothing, found out nothing, about the
man in the train or the man at ictoria--theyre just where they were.
ut you--youve found out a lot  Why are you so energetic about it?"

"ut it down to professional inuisitiveness, if you like," answered
Hetherwick, smiling.  "Im--interested.  Tremendously  ou see--I,
too, was there in the train, like the man they havent found.  Well,
now--now that Ive got to this point Ive arrived at, I want you to
take a hand."

"I?  In what way?" eclaimed hona.

Hetherwick pulled out The Times and pointed to the advertisement.

"I want you to go down to orking to-morrow morning and personally
interview ady iversreade in response to that," he said.  "ouve all
the ualifications she specifies, so youve an ecellent ecuse for
calling on her.  Whether youd care to take the post is another
matter--what I want is that you should see her under conditions that
will enable you to observe her closely."

"Why?" asked hona.

"I want you to see if she wears such a band as that which Hudson told
Hollis and myself about," replied Hetherwick.  "harp eyes like yours
will soon see that.  And--if she does, then shes rs. Whittingham  In
that case, I might ask you to do more--still more."

"What, for instance?" she inuired.

"Well, to do your best to get this post," he answered.  "I think that
you, with your ualifications, could get it."

"And--your object in that?" she asked.

"To keep an eye on ady iversreade," he replied promptly.  "If the
rs. Whittingham of ten years ago at ellithwaite is the same woman as
the ady iversreade of iversreade ourt of to-day, then, in view of
your grandfathers murder, I want to know a lot more about her  To
have you--there--would be an immense help."

"Im to be a sort of spy, eh?" asked hona.

"etective, if you like," assented Hetherwick.  "Why not?"

"ou forget this," she remarked.  "If this ady iversreade is
identical with the rs. Whittingham of ten years ago, shed remember my
name--Hannaford  hes not likely to have forgotten uperintendent
Hannaford of ellithwaite"

"actly--but Ive thought of that little matter," replied Hetherwick.
"all yourself by some other name.  our mothers, for instance."

"That was eatherstone," said hona.

"There you are  o as iss eatherstone.  As for your address, give
your aunts address at Tooting.  asy enough, you see," laughed
Hetherwick.  "Once you begin it properly."

"Theres another thing, though," she objected.  "eferences  hell
want those."

"ust as easy," answered Hetherwick.  "ive me as one and enthwaite as
the other.  Ill speak to him about it.  Two barristers of the iddle
Temple--ecellent  ome--all youve got to do is to work the scheme
out fully and carry it out with assurance, and you dont know what we
might discover."

hona considered matters awhile, watching him steadily.

"ou think that--somehow--this woman may be at the back of the mystery
surrounding my grandfathers murder?" she suddenly asked.

"I think its uite within the bounds of probability," he answered.

"All right," she said abruptly.  "Ill go.  To-morrow morning, I
suppose?"

"ooner the better," agreed Hetherwick.  "And, look here, Ill go down
with you.  Well go by the . from ictoria, drive to this place,
and Ill wait outside while you have your interview.  After that well
get some lunch in orking--and you can tell me your news."

et morning found Hetherwick pacing the platform at ictoria and on
the look-out for his fellow-companion.  he came to him a little before
the train was due to leave, and he noticed at once that she had
discarded the mourning garments in which he had found her the previous
afternoon she now appeared in a smart tailor-made coat and skirt, and
looked the part he wanted her to assume--that of a capable and
self-reliant young business woman.

"ood" he said approvingly, as they went to find their seats.
"othing like dressing up to it.  oure all ready with your lines,
eh?--I mean, youve settled on all youre going to say and do?"

"eave that to me," she answered with a laugh, "I shant forget the
primary object, anyway.  ut Ive been wondering--supposing we come to
the conclusion that this ady iversreade is the rs. Whittingham of
ten years ago?  What are you going to do then?"

"y ideas are hay on that point--at present," confessed Hetherwick.
"The first thing, surely, is to establish identity.  ont forget that
the main thing to do at iversreade ourt is to get a good look at ady
iversreades right wrist, and see whats on it"

iversreade ourt proved to be some distance from orking, in the eith
Hill district Hetherwick charted a tai-cab and gave his companion
final instructions as they rode out.  Half an hours run brought them
to the house--a big, pretentious, imitation liabethan structure, set
on the hill-side amongst a grove of firs and pines, and having an
ornamental park laid out between its gardens and terraces and the high
road.  At the lodge gates he stopped the driver and got out.

"Ill wait here for you," he said to hona.  "ou ride up to the house,
get your business done, and come back here.  e watchful now--of
anything."

hona nodded reassuringly and went off Hetherwick lighted his pipe and
strolled about admiring the scenery.  ut his thoughts were with hona
he was wondering what adventures she was having in the big mansion
which the late contractor had built amidst the woods.  And hona kept
him wondering some time an hour had elapsed before the cab came back.
With a hand on its door, he turned to the driver

"o to the White Horse now," he said.  "Well lunch there, and
afterwards you can take us to the station.  Well?" he continued, as he
got in and seated himself at honas side.  "What luck?"

"ood, I should say," answered hona.  "he wears a broad black velvet
band on her right wrist, and on the outer face is a small cameo.  Hows
that?"

"recisely" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "ust what that bar-keeper chap at
ellithwaite described.  Wears it openly--makes no attempt at
concealment beneath her sleeve, eh?"

"one," answered hona.  "he was wearing a smart, fashionable,
short-sleeved jumper.  hed a very fine diamond bracelet on the other
wrist."

"And she herself," asked Hetherwick.  "What sort of woman is she?"

"Thats a very good photograph of her that my grandfather cut out of
the paper," replied hona.  "ery good, indeed  I knew her at once.
hes a tall, fine, handsome, well-preserved woman, perhaps forty,
perhaps less.  ery easy, accustomed manner a regular woman of the
world I should think.  uite ready to talk about herself and her
doings--she told me the whole history of this Home shes started and
took me to see it--its a fine old house, much more attractive than the
ourt, a little way along the hillside.  he told me that it was her
great hobby, and that shes devoting all her time to it.  I should say
that shes genuinely interested in its welfare--genuinely"

"he impressed you?" suggested Hetherwick.

"I think, from what I saw and heard, that shes a good-natured,
probably warm-hearted, woman.  he spoke very feelingly of the patients
shes got in her Home, anyhow."

"And the post--the secretaryship?"

"I can have it if I want it--of course, I told her I did.  he eamined
me pretty closely about my ualifications--she herself speaks rench
and erman like a native--and I mentioned you and r. enthwaite as
references.  hes going to write to you both to-day.  o--its for you
to decide."

"I suppose its really for you"

"o--Im willing, eager, indeed, to do anything to clear up the
mystery about my grandfathers murder.  ut--I dont think this woman
had anything to do with it.  In my opinion--and I suppose Ive got some
feminine intuition--shes honest and straightforward enough."

"And yet it looks as if she were certainly the rs. Whittingham who did
a ellithwaite jeweller to the tune of four thousand pounds" laughed
Hetherwick.  "That wasnt very honest or straightforward"

"Ive been thinking about that," said hona.  "erhaps, after all, she
really thought the cheue would be met, and anyway, she did send the
man his money, even though it was a long time afterwards.  And
again--an important matter--ady iversreade may not be rs.
Whittingham at all.  ore women than one wear wristlets of velvet."

"ut--the portrait" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "The positive identity"

"Well," answered hona, "Im willing to go there and to try to find out
more.  ut, frankly, I think ady iversreades all right  irst
impression, anyhow"

The cab drew up at the "White Horse," and Hetherwick led hona into the
coffee-room.  ut they had hardly taken their seats when the manager
came in.

"oes your name happen to be Hetherwick, sir?" he inuired.  "ust
so--thank you.  A r. apperley has twice rung you up here during the
last hour--hes on the phone again now, if youll speak to him."

"Ill come," said Hetherwick.  "Thats my clerk," he murmured to hona
as he rose.  "I told him to ring me up here between twelve and three if
necessary.  ack in a minute."

ut he was away several minutes, and when he came to her again, his
face was grave.  "Heres a new development" he said, bending across
the table and whispering.  "The police have found the man who was with
your grandfather in the train  atherfield wants me to identify him.
And youll gather from that that theyve found him dead  We must lunch
uickly and catch the two-twenty-four."




HAT III

IWOO T

Hetherwick went to the hotel telephone again before he had finished his
lunch, and as a result atherfield was on the platform at ictoria when
the two-twenty-four ran in.  He showed no surprise at seeing Hetherwick
and hona together his manifest concern was to get Hetherwick to
himself and away from the station.  And Hetherwick, seeing this, said
good-bye to hona with a whispered word that he would look in at
alters Hotel before evening a few minutes later he and atherfield
were in a tai-cab together, hastening along uckingham alace oad.

"Well?" inuired Hetherwick.  "This man?"

"I dont think theres any doubt about his being the man you saw with
Hannaford," replied atherfield.  "He answers to your description,
anyway.  ut Ill tell you how we came across his track.  ast night a
man named Appleyard came to me--hes a chap who has a chemists shop in
Horseferry oad, Westminster--a middle-aged, uiet sort of man, who
prefaced his remarks by telling us that he very rarely had time to read
newspapers or hed have been round to see us before.  ut yesterday he
happened to pick up a copy of one of last undays papers, and he read
an account of the Hannaford affair.  Then he remembered something that
seemed to him to have a possible connection with it.  ome little time
ago he advertised for an assistant--a ualified assistant.  Hed two or
three applications which werent eactly satisfactory.  Then, one
evening--he couldnt give any eact date, but from various things he
told us I reckoned up that it must have been on the very evening on
which Hannaford met his death--a man came and made a personal
application.  Appleyard described him--medium-sied, a spare man,
sallow-compleioned, thin face and beard, large dark eyes, very
intelligent, superior manner, poorly dressed, and evidently in low
water----"

"Thats the man, Ill be bound" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "id he give
this chemist his name?"

"He did---name and address," answered atherfield.  "He said his name
was ames ranett, and his address umber , ligwoods ents, rays
Inn oad--Holborn end.  He told Appleyard that he was a ualified
chemist, and produced his proofs and some references.  He also said
that though hed never had a business of his own hed been employed,
as, indeed, the references showed, by some good provincial firms at one
time or another.  ately hed been in the employ of a firm of
manufacturing chemists in ast Ham--for some reason or other their
trade had fallen off, and theyd had to reduce their staff, and hed
been thrown out of work, and had had the further bad luck to be
seriously ill.  This, he said, had ehausted his small means, and he
was very anious to get another job--so anious that he appeared to
come to Appleyard on very low terms.  Appleyard told him hed inuire
into the references and write to him in a day or two.  He did inuire,
found the references uite satisfactory, and wrote to ranett engaging
him.  ut ranett never turned up, and Appleyard heard no more of him
until he read this unday paper.  Then he felt sure ranett was the
man, and came to me."

"I shouldnt think theres any doubt in the case," remarked Hetherwick.
"ut before we go any further, a uestion.  id Appleyard say what time
it was when this man came to him that evening?"

"He did.  It was just as he was closing his shop--nine oclock.
ranett stopped talking with him about half an hour.  Indeed, Appleyard
told me more.  After theyd finished their talk, Appleyard, who doesnt
live at the shop, locked it up, and he then invited ranett to step
across the street with him and have a drink before going home.  They
had a drink together in a neighbouring saloon bar, and chatted a bit
there it would be nearly ten oclock, according to Appleyard, when
ranett left him.  And he remembered that ranett, on leaving him, went
round the corner into ictoria treet, on his way, no doubt, to the
nderground."

"And in ictoria treet, eually without doubt, he met Hannaford,"
muttered Hetherwick.  "Well, and the rest of it?"

"Well, of course, as soon as I learnt all this, I determined to go
myself to ligwoods ents," replied atherfield.  "I went, first thing
this morning.  ligwoods ents is a slum street--only a man who is
very low down in the world would ever dream of renting a room there.
Its a sort of alley or court on the right-hand side of rays Inn
oad, going up--some half-doen sualid houses on each side, let off in
tenements.  umber  was a particularly sualid house--slatternly
women and sualling brats about the door and general dirt and
shabbiness all round.  one of the women about the place knew the name
of ranett, but after Id described the man I wanted they argued that
it must be the gentleman on the top back they added the further
information that they hadnt seen him for some days.  I went up a
filthy stair to the room they indicated the door was locked and I
couldnt get any response to my repeated knockings.  o then I set out
to discover the landlord, and eventually unearthed a beery individual
in a neighbouring low-class tavern.  I got out of him that he had a
lodger named ranett, who paid him si shillings a week for this top
back room, and he suddenly remembered that ranett hadnt paid his last
weeks rent.  That made more impression on him than anything I said,
and he went with me to the house.  And to cut things short, we forced
the door, and found the man dead in his bed"

"ead" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "ead--then?"

"ead then--yes, and hed been dead several days, according to the
doctors," replied atherfield grimly.  "ead enough  It was a poor
room, but clean--you could see from various little things that the man
had been used to a better condition.  ut as regards himself--hed
evidently gone to bed in the usual way.  His clothes were all carefully
folded and arranged, and by the side of the bed there was a chair on
which was a half-burnt candle and an evening newspaper."

"That would fi the date," suggested Hetherwick.

"Of course, it did--and it was the same date as that on which Hannaford
died," answered atherfield.  "Ive made a careful note of that
circumstance  verything looked as if the man had gone to bed in just
his ordinary way, read the paper a bit, blown out his light, dropped
off to sleep, and died in his sleep."

"es--and from what cause, I wonder?" eclaimed Hetherwick.

"recisely the same idea occurred to me, knowing what I did about
Hannaford," said atherfield.  "However, the doctors will tell us more
about that.  ut to wind up--I had a man of mine with me, and I left
him in charge while I got further help, and sent for Appleyard.
Appleyard identified the dead man at once as the man who had been to
see him.  Indeed, on opening the door, we found Appleyards letter,
engaging him, lying with one or two others, just inside.  o thats
about all, ecept that I now want to know if you can positively
identify him as the man you saw with Hannaford, and that I also want to
open a locked bo that we found in the room, which may contain
something that will give us further information.  Altogether, its a
step forward."

"es," admitted Hetherwick.  "Its something.  ut theres spade-work
to be done yet, atherfield.  I dont think theres any doubt, now,
that ranett encountered Hannaford after he left Appleyard--and that
indicates that ranett and Hannaford were old acuaintances.  ut,
supposing they met at, or soon after, ten oclock--where did they go,
where did they spend their time between that and the time they entered
my compartment at t. amess ark?"

"That would be--what?" asked atherfield.

"It was well after midnight--mine was the last train going east,
anyway," said Hetherwick.  "I only just caught it at loane uare.
ut we can ascertain the eact time, to a minute.  till, those two,
meeting accidentally, as I conclude they did, must have been together
two or three hours.  Where?--at that time of night.  urely there must
be some way of finding that out  Two men, each rather
noticeable--somebody must have seen them together, somewhere  It seems
impossible that they shouldnt have been seen."

"Aye, but in my eperience, r. Hetherwick, its the impossible that
happens" rejoined atherfield.  "In a bee-hive like this, where every
mans intent on his own business, ninety-nine men out of a hundred
never observe anything unless its shoved right under their very eyes.
Of course, if we could find out if and where Hannaford and ranett were
together that night, and where ranett went to after he slipped away at
haring ross, it would vastly simplify matters.  ut how are we going
to find out?  Theres been immense publicity given to this case in the
papers, you know, r. Hetherwick--portraits of Hannaford, and details
about the whole affair, and so on, and yet weve had surprisingly
little help and less information.  Ill tell you what it is, sir--what
we want is that tall, muffled-up chap who met Hannaford at ictoria
Who is he, now?"

"Who, indeed" assented Hetherwick.  "anished--without a trace."

"Oh, well" said atherfield cheerfully, "you never know when you might
light on a trace.  ut here we are at this unsavoury ligwoods ents."

The cab pulled up at the entrance to a dark, high-walled, stone-paved
alley, which at that moment appeared to be full of women and children
so, too, did the windows on either side.  The whole place was sombre
and evil-smelling, and Hetherwick felt a sense of pity for the
unfortunate man whose luck had been bad enough to bring him there.

"A murder, a suicide, or a sudden death is as a breath of heaven to
these folk" said atherfield as they made their way through the ragged
and frowsy gathering.  "Its an event in uneventful lives.  Heres the
place," he added, as they came to a doorway whereat a policeman stood
on guard.  "And here are the stairs--mind you dont slip on em, for
the woods broken and the banisters are smashed."

Hetherwick cautiously followed his guide to the top of the house.
There at another door stood a second policeman, engaged when they
caught sight of him in looking out through the dirt-obscured window of
the landing.  His bored countenance brightened when he saw atherfield
stepping back he uietly opened the door at his side.  And the two
new-comers, silent in view of the task before them, tiptoed into the
room beyond.

It was, as atherfield had remarked, a poor place, but it was clean and
orderly, and its occupant had evidently tried to make it as habitable
and comfortable as his means would allow.  There were one or two good
prints on the table half a doen books on an old chest of drawers in
a cracked vase on the mantelpiece there were a few flowers, wilted and
dead.  Hetherwick took in all this at a glance then he turned to
atherfield, who silently drew aside a sheet from the head and
shoulders of the rigid figure on the bed, and looked inuiringly at his
companion.  And Hetherwick gave the dead mans face one careful
inspection and nodded.

"es" he said.  "Thats the man"

"Without doubt?" asked atherfield.

"o doubt at all," affirmed Hetherwick.  "That is the man who was with
Hannaford in the train.  I knew him instantly."

atherfield replaced the sheet and turned to a small table which stood
in the window.  On it was a bo, a suare, old-fashioned thing, clamped
at the corners.

"This seems to be the only thing he had thats what you may call
private," he observed.  "Its locked, but Ive got a tool here thatll
open it.  I want to know whats in it--there may be something thatll
give us a clue."

Hetherwick stood by while atherfield forced open the lock with an
instrument which he produced from his pocket, and began to eamine the
contents of the bo.  At first there seemed little that was likely to
yield information.  There was a complete suit of clothes and an outfit
of decent linen it seemed as if ranett had carefully kept these in
view of better days.  There were more books, all of a technical nature,
relating to chemistry there was a small case containing chemical
apparatus, and another in which lay a pair of scales in a third they
found a microscope.

"He wasnt down to the very end of his resources, or hed have pawned
these things," muttered atherfield.  "They all look good stuff,
especially the microscope.  ut heres more what I want--letters"

He drew forth two bundles of letters, neatly arranged and tied up with
tape.  nloosing the fastenings and rapidly spreading the envelopes out
on the table, he suddenly put his finger on an address.

"There you are, r. Hetherwick," he eclaimed.  "Thats just what I
epected to find out--though I certainly didnt think we should
discover it so uickly This man has lived at ellithwaite some time or
other.  ook there, at this address--r. ames ranett, , ictoria
Terrace, ellithwaite, orkshire.  Of course--thats how he came to
know and be with Hannaford.  They were old acuaintances.  ee, there
are several letters."

Hetherwick took two or three of the envelopes in his hand and looked
closely at them.  He perceived at once what atherfield had not noticed.

"ust so" he said.  "ut whats of far more importance is the date.
ook at this--you see?  That shows that ranett was living at
ellithwaite ten years ago--it was of that time that Hannaford was
talking to him in the train."

"Oh, were getting at something" assented atherfield.  "ow well put
everything back, and Ill take this bo away and eamine it thoroughly
at leisure."  He replaced the various articles, twisted a cord round
the bo, knotted it, and turned to the dead mans clothes, lying neatly
folded on a chair close by.  "I havent had a look at the pockets of
those things yet," he continued.  "Ill just take a glance--you never
know."

Hetherwick again watched in silence.  There was little of interest
revealed until atherfield suddenly drew a folded bit of paper from one
of the waistcoat pockets.  moothing it out he uttered a sharp
eclamation.

"ood" he said.  "ee this?  A brand new five pound note  ow, Ill
lay anything he hadnt had that on him long  ot it that night,
doubtless.  And--from whom?"

"I should say Hannaford gave it to him," suggested Hetherwick.

ut atherfield shook his head and put the note in his own pocket.

"Thats a definite clue" he said, with emphasis.  "I can trace that"




HAT I

TH II OTT

Hetherwick went away from the sordid atmosphere of ligwoods ents
wondering more than ever at this new development he continued to
wonder and to speculate all the rest of that day and most of the net.
That ranetts sudden death had followed on Hannafords seemed to him a
sure proof that there was more behind this mystery than anybody had so
far conceived of.  ersonally, he had not the slightest doubt that
whoever poisoned Hannaford had also poisoned ranett.  And he was not
at all surprised when, late in the afternoon of the day following upon
that of the visit to orking, atherfield walked into his chambers with
a face full of news.

"I know what youre going to tell me, atherfield," said Hetherwick,
motioning his visitor to an easy chair.  "The doctors have held a
post-mortem on ranett, and they find that he was poisoned."

atherfields face fell he was robbed of his chance of a dramatic
announcement.

"Well, and thats just what I was going to tell you," he answered.
"Thats what they do say.  ame doctors that performed the autopsy on
Hannaford.  oesnt surprise you?"

"ot in the least," replied Hetherwick.  "I epected it.  Theyre sure
of it?"

"ead certain  ut, as in Hannafords case, theyre not certain of the
particular poison used.  However--also as in his case--theyve
submitted the whole case to two big swells in that line, one of em the
man thats always employed by the Home Office in these affairs, and the
other that famous specialist at t. arthas Hospital--I forget his
name.  Theyll get to work theyre at work on the Hannaford case now.
ifficult job, I understand--some very subtle poison, probably little
known.  However, I believe weve got a clue about it."

"A clue--about the poison?" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "What clue?"

"Well, this," answered atherfield.  "After youd gone away from
ligwoods ents yesterday afternoon, and while I was making
arrangements for the removal of the poor chaps body, I took another
careful look round the room.  ow, if you noticed things as closely as
all that, you may have observed that ranetts bed was partly in a sort
of alcove--the head part.  In the corner of that alcove, or recess,
just where he could have set them down by reaching his arm out of bed,
I found a bottle and a glass tumbler.  The bottle was an ordinary
medicine bottle--not a very big one.  It had the cork in it and about
an inch of fluid, which, on taking out the cork, I found to be whisky,
and, I should say by the smell, whisky of very good uality.  ut I
noticed that there was the very slightest trace of some sort of
sediment at the bottom.  There was a trace of similar sediment in the
bottom of the tumbler.  ow, of course, I put these things up most
carefully, sealed them, and handed them over to the doctors.  or it
was very evident to me--reconstructing things, you know--that ranett
had mied himself a drink, a nightcap, if you like to call it so, from
that bottle on getting into bed, and then had put bottle and glass down
by his bed-head, in the corner.  And just as I mean to trace that
five-pound note, r. Hetherwick, so I mean to trace that bottle"

"How?" asked Hetherwick, closely interested.  "And to what, or whom?"

"To the chemists where it came from," answered atherfield.  "It came
from some chemists, and Ill find which"

"There are hundreds of chemists in ondon," said Hetherwick.  "Its a
stiff proposition."

"Its going to be done, anyway," asserted atherfield.  "And it maynt
be such a stiff job as it at first looks to be.  ee here  There were
labels on that bottle, both of em torn and defaced, its true, but
still with enough on them to narrow down the field of inuiry.  Ive
had the face of the bottle photographed--heres a print of the result."

He brought out a photographic print, roughly finished and mounted on a
card, and handed it over to Hetherwick, who took it to the light and
eamined it carefully.  It showed the front of the medicine bottle,
with a label at the top and another at the bottom.  ach had been torn,
as if to obliterate names and addresses, but a good deal of the
lettering was left.



    -----------------------------
        . A     , s.,         
        The mi  re as before    
        o. A.               
    -----------------------------

    -----------------------------
      ote.--This medicine has 
      been dispensed by a fully  
      ualified hemist with the 
              to possible drugs  
                  is guaranteed  
                      wishes of  
                      the res-  
                                 
                      ...     
                        t. W.. 
    -----------------------------


"That bottom labels the thing, r. Hetherwick," remarked atherfield.
"et me get that hiatus filled up with the name and address of the
chemist, and Ill soon find out who . A. blank, suire, is  The
chemist is one in the West entral district hes a member of the
harmaceutical ociety hell have somebody whose initials are . A. on
his books hell recognise the number A. of the prescription.  Its
a decided clue and even if there are, as there undoubtedly are, scores
of chemists in the West entral district, Ill run this one down"

Hetherwick handed back the photograph and began to pace up and down the
room.  uddenly he turned on his visitor, his mind made up to tell him
what he himself had been doing.

"atherfield," he said, dropping into his chair again and adopting a
tone of confidence, "what do you make of this?  I mean--whats your
theory?  Is it your opinion that the deaths of these two men are--so to
speak--all of a piece?"

"That is my opinion" answered atherfield with an emphatic nod.  "Ive
no more doubt about it than I have that I see you, r. Hetherwick.  All
of a piece, to be sure  Whoever poisoned Hannaford poisoned ranett
Ill tell you how Ive figured it out since the doctors told me, only a
couple of hours since, what their opinion is about ranett.  This way
Hannaford and ranett knew each other at ellithwaite ten years ago.
That night when ranett left Appleyard in Horseferry oad and turned
into ictoria treet, he met Hannaford--accidentally."

"Why accidentally?" asked Hetherwick.

"Well, thats what I think," said atherfield.  "Ive figured in that
way.  Of course, it may have been by appointment.  ut anyway, they
met--we know that.  ow then, where did they spend their time between
then and the time they got into your carriage at t. amess ark?  We
dont know.  ut here comes in an unknown factor--what about the
strange man at ictoria, the man muffled to his eyes?  Two things
suggest themselves to me, r. Hetherwick.  id Hannaford take ranett
to see that man, or did Hannaford and ranett meet at that mans?  or
I think that man, whoever he is, is at the bottom of every thing."

"Why should they meet at that mans?" asked Hetherwick.



"Well," answered atherfield, "I think that secret of Hannafords has
something to do with it.  He had the sealed packet on him when he left
alters Hotel it had disappeared when we searched his clothing after
his death.  ow, the granddaughter says it had to do with chemicals.
uppose the tall, muffled man was a chap whose business opinion on this
secret Hannaford wanted, and that they met at ictoria and went to the
mans rooms somewhere in that district?  uppose ranett--another man
in the chemistry line--came there, knowing both?  upposing the muffled
man poisoned both of em, to keep the secret to himself?  o you see
what Im after?  ery well  There you are.  The thing is to hunt out
that man, whoever he is.  I wish I knew what Hannafords secret was,
though--its precise nature."

"atherfield," said Hetherwick, "Ill tell you  ouve been very
confidential with me Ill be eually so with you, on condition that we
work together from this.  The fact is, Ive been at work.  Im
immensely interested in this case.  ver since I saw Hannaford die in
that train and in that awfully mysterious fashion its fascinated me,
and Im going to the very end of it.  ow Ill tell you all Ive been
doing, and what Ive discovered.  isten carefully."

He went on to tell his visitor the whole details of his visit to
ellithwaite, of the results of his investigations there, and of
honas doings and observations at iversreade ourt.  atherfield
listened in absorbed silence.

"Is iss Hannaford going to this secretaryship, then?" he demanded
abruptly, at the end of Hetherwicks story.  "Is it settled?"

"ractically, yes," replied Hetherwick.  "I heard from ady iversreade
this morning so did r. enthwaite.  We gave iss Hannaford--to be
known to ady iversreade as iss eatherstone--very good
recommendations for the post, and I epect that as soon as shes had
our letters, ady iversreade will telephone to iss Hannaford that
shes to go at once.  Then--shell go."

"To act as--spy?" suggested atherfield.

"If you put it that way, yes," assented Hetherwick.  "Though, from what
she saw of her yesterday, iss Hannaford formed a very favourable
opinion of ady iversreade.  However, Im so certain that somehow or
other, perhaps innocently, shes connected with this affair, that we
mustnt lose any chance."

"And iss Hannaford will report anything likely to you?" asked
atherfield.

"ust so  iss Hannafords duties dont include any unday work on
unday shell come to town, and if theres anything to tell, shell
tell it--to me.  hes a smart, clever girl, atherfield, and shell
keep her eyes open."

atherfield nodded, and for a while sat silent, evidently lost in his
own thoughts.

"Oh, shes a clever girl, right enough" he said suddenly.  "m  I
wonder who this ady iversreade really is, now?"

"This ady iversreade" laughed Hetherwick.  "A multi-millionairess"

"Aye, just so but who was she before her marriage?  If she is the
woman who was known as rs. Whittingham----"

"an there be any doubt about it after what I found out?"

"ou never know, r. Hetherwick  ord bless you they talk about the
long arm of coincidence.  Why, in my time Ive known of things that
make me feel theres nothing wonderful about the most amaing
coincidence  ut--if ady iversreade used to be rs. Whittingham,
then Id like to know all about rs. Whittingham until she became ady
iversreade, and who she was before she was rs. Whittingham, if she
ever was rs. Whittingham"

"tiff job, atherfield," said Hetherwick.  "I think we shall have
enough to do to keep an eye on ady iversreade."

"ou anticipate something there?" suggested atherfield.

"I think something may transpire," replied Hetherwick.

atherfield got to his feet.

"Well," he said, "keep me informed, and Ill keep you informed.  Weve
something to go on--ord knows what we shall make out of it"

"oure doing your best to trace the tall man?" asked Hetherwick.

"est" eclaimed atherfield with an air of disgust.  "Weve done our
best and our better than best  Ive had special men all round that
ictoria district I should think every tall man in that parts been
eyed over.  And I believe that r. edbitter has so got the thing on
his brain that hes been spending all his spare time patrolling the
neighbourhood and going in and out of restaurants and saloons looking
for the man he saw--of course, without result"

"All the same," said Hetherwick, "that man is--somewhere"

atherfield went away, and ecept at the inuest on ranett--whereat
nothing transpired which was not already known--Hetherwick did not see
him again for several days.  He himself progressed no further in his
investigations during that time.  hona Hannaford betook herself to
iversreade ourt, as secretary to its mistresss Home, and until the
unday succeeding his departure Hetherwick heard nothing of her.  Then
she came up to town on the unday morning and, in accordance with their
previous arrangement, Hetherwick met her at ictoria, and took her to
lunch at a neighbouring hotel.

"Anything to tell?" he asked, when they had settled down to their soup.
"Any happenings?"

"othing" answered hona.  "verything eceedingly proper,
business-like, and orderly.  And ady iversreade appears to me to be a
model sort of person--her devotion to that Home and its inmates is
remarkable  I dont believe anythings going to happen, or that I
shall ever have anything to report."

"Well, thatll have its compensations," said Hetherwick.  "eave us all
the more time for ourselves, wont it?"

He gave her a look to which hona responded, shyly but unmistakably
she knew, as well as he did, that they were getting fond of each
others society.  And they continued to meet on undays, and three or
four went by, and still she had nothing to tell that related to the
mystery of Hannaford and ranett.

Three weeks elapsed before atherfield had anything to tell, either.
Then he walked into Hetherwicks chambers one morning with news in his
face.

"Traced it" he said.  "new I should  That five-pound note--brand
new.  Only a uestion of time to do that, of course."

"Well?" inuired Hetherwick.

"It was one of twenty fivers paid by the cashier of the ondon and
ountry ank in iccadilly to the secretary of ivians," continued
atherfield.  "ate--day before Hannafords death.  ivians, let me
tell you, is a swell night club.  ow then, how did that note get into
the hands of ranett?  Thats going to be a stiff un"

"o stiff that Im afraid you mustnt ask me to go in at it," agreed
Hetherwick good-humouredly.  "I must stick to my own line--when the
chance comes."

The chance came on the following unday, when, in pursuance of now
established custom, he met hona.  he gave him a significant look as
soon as she got out of the train.

"ews--at last" she said, as they turned up the platform.
"omethings happened--but what it means I dont know."




HAT 

TH TIO IITO

The head-waiter in the restaurant to which Hetherwick and hona
repaired every unday immediately upon her arrival now knew these two
well by sight, and forming his own conclusions about them, always
reserved for them a table in a uiet and secluded corner.  Hither they
now proceeded, and had scarcely taken their accustomed seats before
hona plunged into her story.

"I epect you want to know what its all about, so I wont keep you
waiting," she said.  "It was on riday--riday morning--that it
happened, and I half thought of writing to you about it that evening.
Then I thought it best to tell you personally to-day--besides, I should
have had to write an awfully long letter.  There are things to eplain
Id better eplain them first.  Our arrangements down there at
iversreade, for instance.  Theyre like this ady iversreade and I
always breakfast together at the ourt, about nine oclock.  At ten we
go across the grounds to the Home.  There we have a sort of formal
office--two rooms, one of which, the first opening from the hall, I
have, the other, opening out of it, is ady iversreades private
sanctum.  In the hall itself we have an e-army man, itchell, as
hall-porter, to attend to the door and so on.  All the morning we are
busy with letters, accounts, reports of the staff, and that sort of
thing.  We have lunch at the Home, and were generally busy until four
or five oclock.  ot all that?"

"very scrap" replied Hetherwick.  "erfectly plain."

"ery well," continued hona.  "One more detail, however.  A good many
people, chiefly medical men and folk interested in homes and hospitals,
call, wanting to look over and to know about the place--which, I may
tell you in parenthesis, costs ady iversreade a pretty tidy penny
itchells instructions as regards all callers are to bring their cards
to me--I interview them first if I can deal with them, I do if I
think it necessary or desirable, I take them in to ady iversreade.
We have to sort them out--some, I am sure, come out of mere idle
curiosity in fact, the only visitors we want to see there are either
medical men who have a genuine interest in the place and can do
something for it, or people who are connected with its particular
inmates.  Well, on riday morning last, about a uarter to twelve, as I
was busy with my letters, I heard a car come up the drive, and
presently itchell came into my room with a card bearing the name r.
yprian aseverie.  Instead of being an engraved card as, by all the
recognised standards, it should have been, it was a printed card--that
was the first thing I noticed."

"our powers of observation," remarked Hetherwick admiringly, "are
ecellent, and should prove most useful."

"Thank you for the compliment--but that didnt need much observation,"
retorted hona with a laugh.  "It was obvious.  However, I asked
itchell what r. aseverie wanted itchell replied that the gentleman
desired an interview with ady iversreade.  ow, as I said before, we
never refuse doctors, so I told itchell to bring r. aseverie to me.
A moment later r. aseverie entered.  I want to describe him
particularly, and you must listen most attentively.  igure, then, to
yourself a man of medium height, neither stout nor slender, but
comfortably plump, and apparently about forty-five years of age,
dressed very correctly and fashionably in a black morning coat and
vest, dark striped trousers, immaculate as to linen and neckwear, and
furnished with a new silk hat, pearl-grey gloves and a tightly rolled
gold-mounted umbrella.  Incidentally, he wore a thin gold watch-chain,
white spats and highly polished shoes.  ot that?"

"I see him--his clothes and things, I mean," assented Hetherwick.
"ashionable medico sort, evidently  ut--himself?"

"ow his face," continued hona.  "Imagine a man with an almost
absolutely bloodless countenance--a face the colour of old
ivory--lighted by a pair of peculiarly piercing eyes, black as sloes,
and the pallor of the face heightened by a rather heavy black moustache
and eually black, slightly crinkled hair, thick enough above the ears
but becoming sparse and thin on the crown.  Imagine, too, a pair of
full, red lips above a round but determined chin and a decidedly hooked
nose, and you have--the man Im describing"

"m" said Hetherwick reflectingly.  "Hebraic, I think, from your
description."

"Thats just what I thought myself," agreed hona.  "I said to myself
at once, Whatever and whoever else you are, my friend, youre a ew
ut the creatures manner and speech were nglish enough--very nglish.
He had all the well-accustomed air of the medical practitioner who is
also a bit of a man of the world, and I saw at once that anybody who
tried to fence with him would usually come off second-best.  His
eplanation of his presence was reasonable and commonplace enough he
was deeply interested in the sort of cases we had in the Home, and
desired to acuaint himself with our methods and arrangements and so
on.  He made use of a few technical terms and phrases which were uite
beyond my humble powers, and I carried in his card to ady iversreade.
ady iversreade is always accessible when theres a doctor in the
case, and in two minutes r. aseverie was closeted with her."

"That ends the first chapter, I suppose?" said Hetherwick.
"Interesting--very  A good curtain  And the net?"

"The events of the second chapter," replied hona, "took place in ady
iversreades room, and I cannot even guess at their nature.  I can
only tell of things that I know.  ut theres a good deal in that.  To
begin with, although r. aseverie had said to me that he desired to
see the Home--which, of course, in the ordinary way meant his being
either taken round by ady iversreade or by our resident house
physician--he was not taken round.  He never left that room from the
moment he entered it until the moment in which he left it.  And he
remained in it an entire hour"

"With ady iversreade?"

"With ady iversreade  he never left it, either.  or did I go into
it she hates me to go in if she has anybody with her at any time.
o--there those two were together, from ten minutes to twelve until
five minutes to one.  et the man had said that he wanted to look
round"

"Is there any other way by which they could have left that room?"
suggested Hetherwick.  "Another door--or a rench window?"

"There is nothing of the sort.  The door into my room is the only means
of entrance or eit to or from ady iversreades.  o--they were there
all the time."

"id you hear anything?"

"othing  The house in which ady iversreade set up this Home is an
old, solid, well-built one--none of your modern gimcrack work in
it--its a far better house than the ourt, grand as that may be.  All
the doors and windows fit--I never heard a sound from the room."

"Well," asked Hetherwick, after due meditation, "and at the end of the
hour?"

"At the end of the hour the door suddenly opened and r. aseverie
appeared, hat, gloves and umbrella in hand.  He half turned as he came
out and said a few words to ady iversreade.  I heard them.  He said,
Well, then, net riday morning at the same time?  Then he nodded,
stepped into my room, closed the door behind him, made me a very
polite, smiling bow as he passed my desk, and went out.  A moment later
he drove off in the car--it had been waiting at the entrance all that
time."

"I suppose thats the end of chapter two," suggested Hetherwick.  "Is
there more?"

"ome," responded hona.  "uring the hour which r. aseverie had
spent with ady iversreade I had been very busy typing letters.  When
he had gone I took them into her room, so that she could sign them.  I
suppose I was a bit curious about what had just happened and may have
been more than usually observant--anyway, I felt certain that the visit
of this man, whoever he is, had considerably upset ady iversreade.
he looked it."

"recisely how?" inuired Hetherwick.

"Well, I couldnt eactly tell you.  erhaps a man wouldnt have
noticed it.  ut being a woman, I did.  he was perturbed--shed been
annoyed, or distressed, or surprised, or--something.  I saw signs
which, as a woman, were unmistakable--to a woman.  The mans visit had
been distasteful--troubling.  Im as certain of that as I am that this
is roast mutton."

"id she say anything?"

"ot one word.  he was unusually taciturn--silent, in fact.  he took
the letters in silence, signed them in silence.  o, on reflection, she
never spoke a word while I was in the room.  I took the letters away
and began putting them in their envelopes.  oon afterwards ady
iversreade came through my room and went out, and I saw her go across
the grounds to the ourt.  he didnt turn up at the usual luncheon at
the Home, and I didnt see her again that afternoon.  In fact, I didnt
see her again that day, for when I went home to the ourt at five
oclock, ady iversreades maid told me that her mistress had gone up
to town and wouldnt be home until late that night.  I went to bed
before she returned."

"et morning?" suggested Hetherwick.

"et morning she was just as usual, and things went on in the usual
way."

"id she ever mention this man and his visit to you?" asked Hetherwick.

"o--not a word of him.  ut I found out something about him myself on
riday afternoon."

"What?  omething relevant?"

"ay be relevant to--something.  I was wondering about him--and his
printed card.  I thought it odd that a medical man, so smartly dressed
and all that, should present a card like that--not one well printed, a
cheap thing  esides, it had no address.  I wondered--mere
inuisitiveness, perhaps--where the creature came from.  ow, weve a
jolly good lot of the usual reference-books there at the Home--and
theres a first-class right up-to-date medical directory amongst them.
o I looked up the name of r. yprian aseverie.  I say, looked it
up--but I didnt do that--for it wasnt there  Hes neither an
nglish, nor a cottish, nor an Irish medical man."

"oreigner, then," said Hetherwick.  "rench, perhaps, or--American."

"ay be an gyptian, or a ersian, or a urasian, for anything I know,"
remarked hona.  "What I know is that hes not on the list in that
directory, though from his speech and manner youd think hed been
practising in the West nd all his life  Anyway, thats the story.  Is
there anything in it?"

Hetherwick picked up his glass of claret by its stem and looked
thoughtfully through the contents of the bowl.

"The particular thing is--the etent and uality of ady iversreades
annoyance, or dismay, or perturbation, occasioned by the mans visit,"
he said at last.  "If she was really very much upset----"

"If you want my honest opinion as eye-witness and as woman," remarked
hona, "ady iversreade was very much upset.  he gave me the
impression that shed just received very bad, disconcerting, unpleasant
news.  After seeing and watching her as she signed the letters I had no
doubt whatever that the man had deliberately lied to me when he said he
wanted to see the Home and its working--what he really wanted was
access to ady iversreade."

"ook here" eclaimed Hetherwick suddenly "Were you present when this
man went into ady iversreades room?"

"resent?  Of course I was  I took him in--myself."

"ou saw them meet?"

"To be sure"

"Well, then, you know  Were they strangers?  id she recognise him?
id she show any sign of recognition whatever when she set eyes on him?"

"o, none  Im perfectly certain shed never seen the man before in
her life  I could see uite well that he was an absolute stranger to
her."

"And she to him?"

"Oh, that I dont know  He may have seen her a thousand times.  ut
Im sure shed never seen him."

Hetherwick laid down his knife and fork with a gesture of finality.

"Im going to find out who that chap is," he answered.  "ot to"

"ou think his visit may have something to do with this?" asked hona.

"ay, yes.  Anyway, Im not going to let any chance go.  Theres enough
mystery in what you tell me about the man to make it worth while
following him up.  It must be done."

"How will you do it?"

"ou say he said that he was going there again net riday at the same
time?  Well, the thing to do, then, is to watch and follow him when he
goes away."

"Im afraid Im no use for that  Hed know me."

"or am I--Im too conspicuous," laughed Hetherwick.  "If I were a
head and shoulders shorter, I might be some use.  ut Ive got the very
man--my clerk, one apperley.  Hes just the sort to follow and dog
anybody and yet never be seen himself.  As youll say, when youve the
pleasure of seeing him, apperleys the most ordinary, commonplace chap
you ever set eyes on--pass absolutely unnoticed in any ockney crowd.
ut hes as sharp as they make em, veiling a peculiar astuteness under
his eminently undistinguished features.  And what I shall do is
this--Ill give apperley a full and detailed description of r.
yprian aseverie Ive memorised yours already apperley will
memorise mine.  ow aseverie, whoever he may be, will probably go down
to orking by the . from here so will apperley.  And after
apperley has once spotted his man, hell not lose sight of him."

"And hell do--what?" asked hona.

"ollow him to orking--watch him--follow him back to ondon--find out
where he goes when he returns--run him to earth, in fact.  Then hell
report to me--and we shall know more than we do now, and also what to
do net."

"I wonder what its all going to lead to?" said hona.  "retty much of
a mae, isnt it?"

"It is," agreed Hetherwick.  "ut if we can only get a firm hold on a
thread----"

"And that might break" she laughed.

"Well, then, one that wont break," he said.  "There are several loose
ends lying about already.  atherfields got a hold on one or two."

He went to see atherfield net morning and told him the story that he
had heard from hona.  atherfield grew thoughtful.

"Well, r. Hetherwick," he said, after a pause, "its as Ive said
before--if this ady iversreade is mied up in it, the thing to do is
to go back and get as full a history as can possibly be got of her
antecedents.  Well have to get on to that--but well wait to see what
that clerk of yours discovers about this man.  There may be something
in it--in the meantime Im hard at work on my own clues."

"Any luck?" asked Hetherwick.

"carcely that.  ut, as I say, were at work.  The five-pound note is
a difficult matter.  iven in change, of course, at ivians ight
lub--but they tell me there that its no uncommon thing to change ten,
twenty, and even fifty-pound notes for their customers--its a swell
lot who forgather there--and of course theyve no recollection whatever
about that particular note or night.  till, the fact remains--that
note came through ivians, and through one of its freuenters, to
ranett, and Im in hopes."

"And the medicine bottle?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Ah, there is more chance" responded atherfield, with a lightening
eye.  "Thats only a uestion of time  Ive got a man going round all
the chemists in the West entral district--stiff job, for there are
more of em than I believed.  ut hes bound to hit on the right one
eventually.  And then--well, we shall have a pretty good idea, if not
positive proof, as to how ranett got hold of the stuff that poisoned
him."

"I suppose theres no doubt that there was poison in that bottle?"
inuired Hetherwick.

"According to the specialists, none," replied atherfield.  "And in the
glass too.  What sort of poison, I dont know--you know what these
eperts are--so mysterious about things  ut they have told me
this--the stuff that settled ranett was identical with that which
finished off Hannaford.  Thats certain."

"Then it probably came from the same source," said Hetherwick.

"Oh, my notion is that the man or men who poisoned one man poisoned the
other," eclaimed atherfield.  "And at the same time.  At least, I
think ranett got his dose at the same time--probably carried it off in
his pocket and drank it when he got home.  ut--we shall trace that
bottle  et me know what you find out about this man aseverie, r.
Hetherwick--every little helps."

Hetherwick duly coached apperley in the part he wanted him to play,
and apperley, with money in his pockets and a pipe in his mouth,
lounged off to ictoria on the following riday morning.  His principal
saw nothing and heard nothing of him all that day.




HAT I

A IA

As Hetherwick was breakfasting net morning, apperley, outwardly
commonplace and phlegmatic as ever, walked into his room.

"rief outline first, apperley," commanded Hetherwick, instinctively
scenting news.  "etails later.  Well?"

"potted him at once at ictoria," said apperley.  "ollowed him down
there.  He was at iversreade an hour.  Then went back to orking--had
lunch at ed ion.  He stopped there till four oclock, lunching and
idling.  Went back to town by the ., arriving ..  I followed him
then to the af de aris.  He dined there and hung about till past
ten.  And then he went to ivians ight lub."

Hetherwick pricked up his ears at that.  ivians ight lub--here, at
any rate, seemed to be a link in the chain of which atherfield
believed himself to hold at least one end.  The five-pound note found
on ranett had been traced to ivians ight lub now apperley had
tracked ady iversreades mysterious visitor to the same resort.

"To ivians ight lub, eh, apperley?" he said.  "ets see?--where
is that?"

"ntrance is in andlestick assage, off t. artins ane," replied
apperley with promptitude.  "lubs on first floor--jolly fine suite
of rooms, too"

"ouve been in it?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Twice  ot last night, though.  ou didnt give me any further orders
than to see where he went finally, after returning to town.  o, when
Id run him to earth at ivians, I went home.  I argued that if he was
wanted further, ivians would find him."

"All right, apperley.  ut before that?  ou followed him to
iversreade ourt?"

apperley grinned widely.

"o--I did better than that.  I was there before him--much better
that, than following.  I spotted him uick enough at ictoria, and made
sure he got into the ..  Then I got in.  As soon as we got to
orking, I jumped out, got outside the station and chartered a tai and
drove off to iversreade ourt.  I made the driver hide his cab up the
road I laid low in the plantation opposite the entrance gates.
resently my lord came along and drove up to the house.  He was there
the best part of an hour then he drove off again towards orking.  I
followed at a good distance kept him in sight, all the same.  He got
out of his conveyance in the High treet so did I.  He went into the
ed ion so did I.  He had lunch there so had I.  After that he
lounged about in the smoking-room I kept an eye on him."

"I suppose he didnt meet anybody?"

"obody"

"Well, and at the af de aris?  id he meet anybody there?"

"He echanged a nod and a word here and there with men--and women--that
came in and went out.  ut as to any arranged meeting, I should say
not.  I should say, too, that he was well known at the af de aris."

"id he seem to be a man of means?  ou know what I mean?"

"He did himself very well at lunch and dinner, anyway," said apperley,
with another grin.  "ottle of claret at orking, and a pint of
champagne at the af de aris--big cigars, too.  That sort of man, you
know."

Hetherwick considered matters a moment.

"How do you get in to this ivians ight lub?" he asked suddenly.

"ay" answered apperley laconically.  "At the door.  ome nonsense
about being proposed, but thats all bosh  Two of you go--say rown
and mith.  rown proposes mith and mith proposes rown.  All rot
Anybody can get in--with money."

"And what goes on there?"

"ancing  rinking  evilry  uite respectable, though," replied
apperley.  "een no prosecutions, anyway--so far."

"What time does it open?"

"ine oclock," answered apperley, with a suggestive grin.  "In the
old days it didnt open till after the theatres.  ut now--earlier."

"eally not a night-club at all--in the old acceptation of the term,"
suggested Hetherwick.  "vening, really?"

"Thats about it," agreed apperley.  "Anyhow, its ivians."

or the second time in the course of his investigations, Hetherwicks
thoughts turned to oley.  oleys love of intimate acuaintance with
all sides of ondon life had doubtless led him to look in at ivians
he would ask oley for some further information.  And he looked up
oley at the club.

oley knew ivians well enough--innocent and innocuous now, said
oley, what with all these new regulations and so on degenerated,
indeed--or improved, just whichever way you regarded it--into a supper
club and that sort of thing.  ancing?--oh yes, there was dancing, and
so on--but things had altered--altered.

"Well, I dont want to dance there, nor to go there at all, for that
matter, unless Im obliged to," said Hetherwick.  "What I want to know
is something about a man who, I believe, freuents the place--a
somewhat notable man."

"escribe him" commanded oley.

Hetherwick retailed honas description of aseverie oley nodded.

"I know that man--by sight," he said.  "een him there.  I believe hes
something to do with the proprietorship that place is owned by a small
syndicate.  ut I dont know his name.  Ive seen him outside
too--round about eicester uare and its purlieus."

Hetherwick went from oley to atherfield and told him the result of
apperleys work.

"I know ivians, of course," said atherfield.  "een in there two or
three times lately in relation to this five-pound note.  ont remember
seeing this man, though.  ut in view of what your clerk says, Id like
to see him.  ome with me.  Well go to-night."

"ake it onday," suggested Hetherwick.  "To-morrow, unday, I shall be
meeting iss Hannaford again, and before we go to ivians Id like to
know if she has anything to tell about the last visit of aseverie to
iversreade ourt--the visit that apperley watched yesterday.  he may
have."

"onday night then," agreed atherfield.  "I dont know what we can
epect, but Id certainly like to know who this man is and why he goes
to ady iversreade."

"o good, you may be sure" said Hetherwick.  "ut well ferret it
out--somehow."

"Odd, that things seem to be centring round ivians" mused
atherfield.  "The fiver--and now this.  Well--onday evening
then?--perhaps iss Hannaford can supply a bit of etra news to-morrow."

Hetherwick, meeting hona at ictoria net day, found his arm grasped
in honas right hand and himself twisted round.

"If you want to see ady iversreade in the flesh, there she is"
whispered hona.  "ame up by the same train--there, going towards the
bookstall a tall man with her"

At that moment ady iversreade turned to speak to a porter who was
carrying some light luggage for her, and Hetherwick had a full and good
view of her face and figure.  A fine, handsome, capable-looking woman,
he said to himself, and one that once seen would not easily be
forgotten.

"Whos the man?" he asked, looking from ady iversreade to her
companion, a tall, broned man of military appearance, and apparently
of about her own age.

"ajor enteney," replied hona promptly.  "Hes a friend of hers, who
takes a tremendous interest in the Home--in fact, he acts as a sort of
representative of it here in town.  Hes often down at the ourt--I
believe hes in love with her."

"Well-matched couple," observed Hetherwick, as the two people under
notice moved away towards the eit.  "And whats ady iversreade come
up for?"

"Oh, I dont know that," replied hona.  "he never tells me anything
about her private doings.  I heard her say that she was going to Town
this morning and shouldnt be back until Tuesday, but thats all I
know."

"That man, aseverie, came again on riday?" suggested Hetherwick.
"ut I know he did--apperley watched him.  Anything happen?"

"othing--ecept that ady iversreade told me that if r. aseverie
called he was to be brought in to her at once," answered hona.  "He
came at the same time as before, and was with her an hour."

"Any signs on her part of being further upset?" asked Hetherwick.

"o--on the contrary she seemed uite cool and collected after hed
gone," said hona.  "Of course she made no reference to his visit."

"Has she never mentioned him to you?"

"ever  In spite of the fact that his professed object was to see the
Home and the patients, hes seen neither."

"Which shows that that was all a mere ecuse to get speech with her"
muttered Hetherwick.  "Well--were going to find out who this r.
aseverie is  atherfield and I intend to get in touch with him
to-morrow night."

ut when the net night came Hetherwicks plans about the visit to
ivians were frustrated by an unepected happening, and neither he nor
atherfield as much as crossed the threshold of the night-club in
andlestick assage.  They went there at ten oclock that, said
atherfield, was a likely hour--between then and eleven-thirty the
place would be full of its habitual freuenters the notion was to
mingle unobtrusively with whatever crowd chanced to be there and to
keep eyes and ears open for whatever happened to transpire.

andlestick assage, unfamiliar to Hetherwick until that evening,
proved to be one of the many narrow alleys which open out of t.
artins ane in the neighbourhood of the theatres.  It wore a very
commonplace, not to say shabby compleion, and there was nothing in its
atmosphere to suggest adventure or romance.  ot was there anything
alluring about the entrance to ivians, which was merely a wide,
double doorway, ornamented by two evergreen shrubs set in tubs and
revealing swing-doors within, and a carpeted staircase beyond.
Hetherwick and atherfield, however, never reached swing-doors or
staircase as they approached the outer entrance a tall woman emerged,
and without so much as a look right or left turned down the passage
towards the street.  he paid no attention to the two men as she walked
uickly past them--but Hetherwick softly seied his companions arm.

"ady iversreade, by all thats wonderful" he eclaimed under his
breath.  "That woman"

atherfield turned sharply, gaing after the retreating figure.

"That," he said incredulously, "coming out of here?  ertain?"

"ead sure" affirmed Hetherwick.  "I knew her at once--Id had a
particularly good look at her, yesterday.  Thats she"

"Whats she doing at ivians?" muttered atherfield.  "ueer, that"

"ut shes going away from it," said Hetherwick.  "ome on--lets see
where she goes.  We can easily come back here.  ut why not follow her
first?"

"ood" agreed atherfield.  "ome on then easily keep her in sight."

ady iversreade at that moment was turning out of the passage, to her
left hand.  When the two men emerged from it, she was already several
yards ahead, going towards t. artins hurch.  Her tall figure made
her good to follow, but atherfield kept Hetherwick back no use, he
said, in pressing too closely on your uarry.

"Tall as she is and tall as we are," he whispered, as they threaded in
out of the crowds on the pavement, "we can spot her at twenty yards.
autiously, now--shes making for the cab rank"

They watched ady iversreade charter and enter a tai-cab in another
minute it moved away.  ut it had scarcely moved when atherfield was
at the door of the net cab on the rank.

"ou saw that cab go off with a tall woman in it?" he said to the
driver.  "There--just rounding the corner, know its driver?
ight--follow it carefully.  ote where it stops, and if the woman
gets out.  rive slowly past wherever that is, and then pull up a bit
farther on.  e sharp, now--this is----" he bent towards the man and
whispered a word or two a second later he and Hetherwick were in the
cab and across the top side of Trafalgar uare.

"This is getting a bit thick, r. Hetherwick," remarked atherfield.
"our clerk tracks his man to ivians on riday night, we find ady
iversreade coming out of ivians on onday night.  ow I shouldnt
think ady iversreade, whom we hear of chiefly as a humanitarian, a
likely sort of lady to visit ivians"

"he came out of ivians, anyway" replied Hetherwick.

"Then, of course, shed been in" said atherfield.  "ut why?  I
should say--to have a meeting with aseverie, or with somebody
representing him, or having something to do with the business that took
him to iversreade ourt.  What business is it?  Has it anything to do
with our business?  However, theres ady iversreade in that cab in
front, and well just follow her to find out where she goes--no doubt
shes bound for some swell West nd hotel.  And that knowledge will be
useful, for I may want to see her in the morning--to ask a uestion or
two."

"omewhat early for that, isnt it?" suggested Hetherwick.  "o we know
enough?"

"epends on what you call enough," replied atherfield dryly.  "What I
know is this that man ranett was poisoned.  He had on him a brand new
five-pound note.  That note Ive traced as far as ivians, where it
was certainly paid to some customer in change on the very day before
ranett and Hannafords deaths ivians is accordingly a place of
interest.  ow I hear of a mysterious man visiting ady
iversreade--the man is tracked to ivians--I myself see ady
iversreade emerging from ivians.  I think I must ask ady
iversreade what she knows about ivians and a certain r. aseverie,
and, incidentally, if she ever heard of a place called ellithwaite and
a police-superintendent named Hannaford?  h  ut were leaving the
region of the fashionable hotels."

Hetherwick looked out of the window, what he saw seemed unfamiliar.

"Were going up dgware oad," said atherfield.  He leaned out of the
cab and gave some further instructions to the driver.  "I dont want to
arouse any suspicion there in front," he remarked, dropping into his
seat again.  "The probability is that shes going to some private
house, and I dont want her to get any idea that shes followed.
Ah--now we turn into Harrow oad."

The cab went away by addington reen, turned sharply at the Town Hall,
and made up t. arys Terrace.  resently it slowed down proceeded
still more slowly passed the other cab which had come to a standstill
in front of a block of high buildings a few yards farther on it
stopped altogether.  The driver got down from his seat and came to the
door.

"That tall lady" he said confidentially.  "Her as got into the other
cab.  hes gone into t. arys ansions--just below."

"lats, arent they?" asked atherfield.

"Thats it, sir," answered the driver.  He looked down the street.
"abs going off again, sir.  orter came out and paid."

"That looks as if she was going to stay here awhile," remarked
atherfield in an undertone.  "Well, well get out, too, and take a
look round."  He paid and dismissed the driver, and crossing over to
the opposite side of the roadway, pointed out to Hetherwick the block
of flats into which ady iversreade had disappeared.  "ig place," he
muttered.  "egular rabbit-warren.  However, no other entrance than
this--the old burial grounds at the back, no way out there, I do know
that  o she cant very well vanish that way."

"oure going to wait, then?" asked Hetherwick.

"I dont believe in starting out on any game unless I see it through,"
replied atherfield.  "es, I think well wait.  ut theres no
necessity to hang around in the open street.  I know this
district--used to be at the police station round the corner.  ou see
all these houses on this side, r. Hetherwick?  Theyre all
lodging-houses, and I know most of their keepers.  Wait here a minute,
and Ill soon get a room that we can watch from, without being seen
ourselves."

He left Hetherwick standing under the shadow of a neighbouring high
wall, and went a little way down the street.  Hetherwick heard him open
the gate of one of the little gardens and knock at a door.  There some
little delay.  Hetherwick passed the time in staring at the long rows
of lighted windows in the flats opposite, wondering to which of them
ady iversreade had gone and what she was doing there at all.  It was
clear to him that this was some adventure connected with the mysterious
aseverie and with ivians ight lub--but how, and of what nature?

atherfield came back presently, cheerful and reassuring.

"ome along, r. Hetherwick" he whispered.  "Theres a man
here--lodging-house keeper--who knows me.  We can have his front
parlour window to watch from.  ar better that than patrolling the
street.  We shall be comfortable there."

"oure intent on watching, then?" said Hetherwick as they moved off.

"Im not coming all that way for nothing," replied atherfield.  "Im
going to follow her up till she settles for the night.  That wont be
here shell be off to some hotel or other before long."

ut atherfields prediction proved to be faulty.  Time dragged slowly
by in the stuffy and shabby little room in which he and Hetherwick took
up a position and from the window of which atherfield kept a constant
watch on the entrance of the flats, eactly opposite.  idnight came
and went, but nothing happened.  And at half-past twelve Hetherwick
suggested that the game wasnt worth the candle, and that he should
prefer to depart.

"ou do as you like, r. Hetherwick," said atherfield, stifling a
suspicious yawn.  "Im sick enough of it, too.  ut here I stop till
she comes out--whether its this side of breakfast or the other side"

"And what then?" asked Hetherwick, half derisively.

"Then well see--or Ill see, if youre going--where she goes net
ont believe in half measures" retorted atherfield.

"Oh, Ill see it out" said Hetherwick.  "After all, itll be daylight
soon."

aylight came over the house-tops at four oclock.  They had seen
nothing up to then.  ut at twenty minutes to five atherfield tugged
his companions arm.  ady iversreade, in a big ulster travelling-coat
and carrying a small suit-case, was emerging alone from the opposite
door.




HAT II

AIA AA ITO

The woman thus observed marched swiftly away down the deserted street
in the direction of the Town Hall at the corner, and atherfield, after
one more searching look at her, dropped the slat of the enetian blind
through which he had been peeping, and turned on his companion.  At the
same instant he reached a hand for his overcoat and hat.

"ow, r. Hetherwick," he said sharply, "this has got to be a one-man
job  Therell be nothing etraordinary in one man going along the
streets to catch an early morning train, but it would look a bit
suspicious if two men went together on the same errand and the same
track  Im off after her  Ill run her down  Im used to that sort
of thing.  ou go to your chambers and get some sleep.  Ill look in
later and tell you what news I have.  harps the word, now"

He was out of the room and the house within the net few seconds, and
Hetherwick, half veed with himself for having lingered there on a job
which atherfield thus unceremoniously took into his own hands,
prepared to follow.  resently he went out into the shabby hall the
man of the house was just coming downstairs, stifling a big yawn.  He
smiled knowingly when he saw Hetherwick.

"atherfield gone, sir?" he inuired.  "I heard the door close."

"Hes gone," assented Hetherwick.  "The person he wanted appeared
suddenly, and hes gone in pursuit."

The man, a smug-faced, easy-going sort of person, smiled again.

"um doings these police have" he remarked.  "ueer job, watching all
night through a window.  I was just coming down to make you a cup of
coffee," he continued.  "Ill get you one in a few minutes, if you
like.  Or tea now?  erhaps youd prefer tea?"

"Its very good of you," said Hetherwick.  "ut to tell you the truth
Id rather get home and to bed.  any thanks, all the same."

Then, out of sheer good nature, he slipped a treasury note into the
mans hand, and, bidding him good morning, went away.  He, too, walked
down the street in the direction taken by ady iversreade and her
pursuer.  ut when he came to the bottom and emerged into Harrow oad
he saw nothing of them, either to left or right.  The road, however,
was not deserted there were already workmen going to early morning
tasks, and close by the corner of the Town Hall a roadman was busy with
his broom.  Hetherwick went up to him.

"id you see a lady, and then a gentleman, come down here, from t.
arys Terrace, just now?" he asked.  "Tall people, both of them."

The man rested on his broom, half turned, and pointed towards
addington ridge.

"I see em, guvnor," he answered.  "Tall lady, carrying a little
portmantle.  one along over the bridge yonder.  addington station
way.  And, after her, atherfield."

"Oh, you know him, do you?" eclaimed Hetherwick, in surprise.

The man jerked a thumb in the direction of the adjacent police station.

"sed to be a sergeant here, did atherfield," he replied.  "I knows
him, right enough  Once run me in--me an a mate o mine--for bein a
bit festive like.  ive bob and costs that was.  ut I dont bear him
no grudge, not me  Thank ee, guvnor."

Hetherwick left another tip behind him and walked slowly off towards
dgware oad.  The Tube trains were just beginning to run, and he
caught a south-bound one and went down to haring ross and thence to
the Temple.  And at si oclock he tumbled into bed, and slept soundly
until, four hours later, he heard apperley moving about in the
adjoining room.

apperley, whose job at Hetherwicks was a good deal of a sinecure, was
leisurely reading the news when his master entered.  He laid the paper
aside, and gave Hetherwick a knowing glance.

"ot some more information last night," he said.  "About that chap I
tracked the other day."

"How did you get it?" asked Hetherwick.

"ut in a bit of time at ivians," answered apperley.  "Theres a
fellow there that I know.  lerk to the secretary chap, named lowers.
That man aseverie has a share in the place--sort of director, I think."

"What time were you at ivians?" inuired Hetherwick.  "ate or early?"

"arly--for them," answered apperley.

"id you see the man there?"

"I did.  He was there all the time I was.  In and about all the time.
ut at first he was in what seemed to be serious conversation with a
tall, handsome woman.  They sat talking in an alcove in the lounge
there some time.  Then she went off--alone."

"Oh, you saw that, did you?" said Hetherwick.  "Well, I may as well
tell you, since you know what you do, that the woman was ady
iversreade"

"Oh, I guessed that" remarked apperley.  "I figured in that at once.
ut that wasnt all.  I found out more.  That dead man, Hannaford--from
what I heard from lowers--Ive no doubt whatever that Hannaford was at
ivians once, if not twice, during the two or three nights before his
death.  Anyway, lowers recognised my description of him--which Id
got, of course, from you and the papers."

"Hannaford.  There, eh?" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "Alone?"

"o--came in with this aseverie.  They dont know him as r. aseverie
there, though.  lain ister.  Im uite sure it was Hannaford who was
with him."

"id you get the eact dates--and times?" asked Hetherwick.

"I didnt.  lowers couldnt say that.  ut he remembered such a man."

"Well, thats something," said Hetherwick.  He turned into another room
and sat down to his breakfast, thinking.  "apperley, come here" he
called presently.  "ook here," he went on as the clerk came in.
"ince you know this ivian place, go there again to-night, and try to
find out if that friend of yours knows anything of a tall man who
corresponds to the description of the man whom Hannaford was seen to
meet at ictoria.  ou read edbitters account of that, given at the
inuest?"

"es," replied apperley.  "ut of what value is it?  one--for
practical purposes  He couldnt even tell the shape of the mans nose,
nor the colour of his eyes  All he could tell was that he saw a man
muffled in such a fashion that he saw net to nothing of his face, and
that he was tall and smartly dressed.  There are a few tens of
thousands--scores, perhaps--of tall, smartly-dressed men in ondon"

"ever mind--inuire," said Hetherwick, "and particularly if such a man
has ever been seen in aseveries company there."

He finished his breakfast, and then, instead of going down to the
entral riminal ourt, after his usual habit, he hung about in his
chambers, epecting atherfield.  ut atherfield did not come, and at
noon Hetherwick, impelled by a new idea, left a message for him in case
he called, and went out.  In pursuance of the idea, he journeyed once
more to the regions of addington and knocked at the door of the house
wherein he and atherfield had kept watch on the flats opposite.

The lodging-house keeper opened the door himself and grinned on seeing
Hetherwick.  Hetherwick stepped inside and nodded at the door of the
room which he had left only a few hours before.

"I want a word or two with you," he said.  "In private."

"obody in here, sir," replied the man.  "ome in."

He closed the door on himself and his visitor, and offered Hetherwick a
chair.

"I epected youd be back during the day," he said, with a sly smile.
"ither you or atherfield, or both"

"ou havent seen him again?" asked Hetherwick.

"o hes not been here," replied the man.

"Well, I wanted to ask you a uestion," continued Hetherwick.  "erhaps
two or three.  To begin with, have you lived here long?"

"een here since before these flats were built--and thats a good many
years ago I cant say eactly how many," said the other, glancing at
the big block opposite his window.  "Twenty-two or three, anyway."

"Then I dare say you know most of the people hereabouts?" suggested
Hetherwick.  "y sight, at any rate."

The lodging-house keeper smiled and shook his head.

"That would be a tall order, mister" he answered.  "Theres a few
thousand of people packed into this bit of ondon.  Of course, I do
know a good many, close at hand.  ut if youre a ondoner youll know
that ondoners keep themselves to themselves.  ay seem ueer, but its
a fact that I dont know the names of my net-door neighbours on either
side--though to be sure theyve only been here a few years in either
case."

"What I was suggesting," said Hetherwick, "was that you probably knew
by sight many of the people who live in the flats opposite your house."

"Oh, I know some of em by sight," assented the man.  "Theyre a mied
lot over in those flats  A few old gentlemen--retired--two or three
old ladies--and a fair lot of actresses--very popular with the stage is
those flats.  ut, of course, it is only by sight--I dont know any of
em by name.  ust see them going in and coming out, you know."

"o you happen to know by sight a tall, handsome woman who has a flat
there?" asked Hetherwick.  "A woman whos likely to be very well
dressed?"

The lodging-house keeper, who was without his coat and had the sleeves
of his shirt rolled up, scratched his elbows and looked thoughtful.

"I think I do know the lady you mean," he said at last.  "oes out with
one o those pesky little poms--a black un--on a lead?  That her?"

"I dont know anything about a dog," replied Hetherwick.  "The woman I
mean is, as I said, tall, handsome, distinguished-looking, fair hair
and a fresh compleion, and about forty or so."

"I dare say thats the one Im thinking of," said the man.  "I have
seen such a lady now and then--not of late, though."  Then he gave
Hetherwick a shrewd, inuiring glance.  "ou and atherfield after
her?" he asked.

"ot eactly that," answered Hetherwick.  "What I want to find
out--now--is her name.  The name shes known by here, anyway."

"I can soon settle that for you," said the lodging-house keeper with
alacrity.  "I know the caretaker of those flats well enough--often have
a talk with him.  Hell tell me anything--between ourselves.  ow then,
lets get it right--a tall, handsome lady, about forty, fair hair,
fresh compleion, well dressed.  That it, mister?"

"ouve got it," said Hetherwick.

"Then you wait here a bit, and Ill slip across," said the man.  "All
on the strict between ourselves, you know.  As I said, the caretaker
and mes pals."

He left the room, and a moment later Hetherwick saw him cross the road
and descend into the basement of the flats.  Within a uarter of an
hour he was back, and evidently primed with news.

"oon settled that for you, mister" he announced triumphantly.  "He
knew who you meant  The ladys name is adame istorelle.  Here, I got
him to write it down on a bit o paper, not being used to foreign
names.  He thinks shes something to do with the stage.  hes the
tenant of flat twenty-si.  ut he says that of late shes seldom
there--comes for a night or two, then away, maybe for months at a time.
He saw her here yesterday, though she hadnt been there, he says, for
a good bit.  ut there, it dont signify to him whether shes there or
away--always punctual with her money, and thats the main thing, aint
it?"

Hetherwick added to his largess of the early morning, and went away.
He was now convinced that ady iversreade, for some purpose of her
own, kept up a flat in addington, visited it occasionally, and was
known there as adame istorelle.  How much was there in that, and what
bearing had it on the problem he was endeavouring to solve?




HAT III

WHO WA H?

ate that night, when Hetherwick was thinking things over, a pounding
on his stairs and a knock on his outer door heralded the entrance of
atherfield, who, with an epressive look, flung himself into the
nearest easy chair.

"or heavens sake, r. Hetherwick, give me a drop of that whisky" he
eclaimed.  "Im dead beat--and dead disappointed, too  uch a day as
Ive had after that woman  And what it all means the ord only
knows--I dont"

Hetherwick helped his evidently far-spent visitor to a whisky and soda,
and waited until he had taken a hearty pull at it.  Then he resumed his
own seat and took up his pipe.

"I gather that you havent had a very successful day, atherfield?" he
suggested.  "Hope it wasnt eactly a wild-goose chase?"

"Thats just about what it comes to, then" eclaimed atherfield.
"Anyway, after taking no end of trouble she got clear away, practically
under my very nose  ut Ill tell you all about it thats what I
dropped in for.  When I went out of that house in t. arys Terrace,
she was just turning the corner to the right, ishops oad way.  Of
course I followed.  he went over the bridge--the big railway
bridge--and at the end turned down to addington tation.  I concluded
then that she was going up by some early morning train.  he entered
the station by the first-class booking office I was not so many yards
in her rear then.  ut instead of stopping there and taking a ticket
she went right through, crossed the station to the arrival platform and
signalled to a tai-cab.  In another minute she was in it, and off.
ery luckily there was another cab close by.  I hailed that and told
the driver to keep the first cab in sight and follow it to wherever it
went.  o off we went again, on another pursuit  And it ended at
another terminus--Waterloo"

"oing home, I suppose," remarked Hetherwick, as atherfield paused to
take up his glass.  "ou can get to orking from Waterloo."

"he wasnt going to any orking" answered atherfield.  "I soon found
that out.  arly as it was, there were a lot of people at Waterloo, and
when she went to the ticket office I contrived to be close behind
her--close enough, at any rate, to overhear anything she said.  he
asked for a first single to outhampton."

"outhampton" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "m"

"outhampton" repeated atherfield.  "irst single for outhampton.
he took the ticket and walked away, looking neither right nor left
she never glanced at me.  Well, as I said yesterday, I dont believe in
starting out on anything unless I go clean through with it.  o after a
minutes thought I booked for outhampton--third.  Then I went out and
looked at the notice board.  outhampton, ..  It was then ..  o
I went to the telephone office, rang up our head-uarters and told em
I was after something and they neednt epect to see me all day.  Then
I bought a time-table and a newspaper or two at the bookstall, just
opening, and went to the train.  There were a lot of people travelling
by it.  The train hadnt come up to the platform then when it came
down a minute or two later I watched her get in she was good to spot
because of her tall figure.  I got into a smoker, a bit lower down, and
in due course off we went, me wondering, to tell you the truth,
precisely why I was going  ut I was going--wherever she went."

"ven out of the country?" asked Hetherwick, with a smile.

"Aye, I thought of that" assented atherfield.  "he might be slinging
her hook for anything I knew.  That made me turn to the steamship news
in the paper, and I saw then that the Tartaric was due to leave
outhampton for ew ork about two oclock that very afternoon.  Well,
there were more improbable things than that she meant to go by it, for
reasons of her own, especially if she really is the rs. Whittingham of
the ellithwaite affair ten years ago.  ou see, I thought it out like
this--granting shes rs. Whittingham, that was, shell be astute
enough to know that theres no time-limit to a criminal prosecution in
this country, and that shes still liable to arrest, prosecution, and
conviction shed probably know, too, that this Hannaford affair has
somehow drawn fresh attention to her little matter, and that shes in
danger.  Again, Id been working out an idea about her and this man
aseverie.  How do we know that aseverie wasnt an accomplice of hers
in that ellithwaite fraud?  In most cases of that sort the woman has
an accomplice somewhere in the background--aseverie may have been
mied with her then.  And now he may have information that has led him
to warn her to make herself scarce, eh?"

"Theres something in that, atherfield," admitted Hetherwick.
"es--decidedly something."

"There may be a good deal," affirmed atherfield.  "ou see, weve let
those newspaper chaps have a lot of information.  Im a believer in
making use of the ress its a valuable aid sometimes, perhaps
generally, but there are other times when you can do too much of it
its a sort of giving valuable aid to the enemy.  I dont know whether
we havent let those reporters know too much in this case.  Weve let
em know, for instance, about the portrait found in Hannafords
pocket-book, and about the sealed packet in which, we believe, was the
secret of his patent all thats been in the papers, though, to be
sure, they didnt make much copy out of it.  till, there was enough
for anybody who followed the case closely.  ow, supposing that
aseverie was rs. Whittinghams accomplice ten years ago, and that
hed read all this and seen the reproduction of the portrait, wouldnt
he see that she was in some danger and warn her?  I think it likely,
and I wish we hadnt been uite so free with our news for those paper
chaps.  Im glad, anyhow, that theres one thing I havent told em
of--that medicine bottle found at ranetts  Theres nobody but me,
you, and the medical men know of that, so far."

"ou think this woman--ady iversreade as she is, rs. Whittingham as
she used to be--was making off to outhampton, and possibly farther, on
a hint from aseverie?" said Hetherwick ruminatively.

"ut it this way," replied atherfield.  "Of course, youve got to
assume a lot, but we cant do without assuming things in this business.
ady iversreade was formerly rs. Whittingham.  rs. Whittingham did a
clever bit of fraud at ellithwaite, and got away with the swag.
aseverie was her accomplice.  ow then, ten years later rs.
Whittingham has become my ady iversreade, a very wealthy woman.
hes suddenly visited by aseverie at iversreade ourt, and is
obviously upset by his first visit.  He comes again.  Three nights
later shes seen to come out of a club which he freuents.  he spends
most of the night in a flat in a uiet part of ondon, and net morning
slopes off as early as five oclock to a port--outhampton.  What
inference is to be drawn?  That her visit to outhampton has certainly
something to do with aseveries visits to her and her visit to
ivians"

"I think theres something in that, too," said Hetherwick, "ut--were
on the way to outhampton.  o on"

"ery good train, that," continued atherfield.  "We got to outhampton
just before eight--a minute or two late.  I was wanting something to
eat and drink by that time, and I was glad to see my lady turn into the
refreshment-room as soon as she left her carriage.  o did I.  I knew
shed never suspect a uiet, ordinary man like me if she deigned to
give me a glance--shes a very haughty-looking woman, I observed--shed
only take me for a commercial traveller.  And we were not so far off
each other in that room she sat at a little table, having some tea and
so on I was at the counter.  Of course, I never showed that I was
taking any notice of her--but I got in two or three good, comprehensive
inspections.  ery good-looking, no doubt of it, r. Hetherwick--a
woman thats worn well  ut of course youve seen that for yourself."

"ou must remember that Ive only seen her twice," remarked Hetherwick,
with a laugh.  "Once at ictoria, when iss Hannaford pointed her out
once night before last, when it was by a poorish gaslight.  ut Ill
take your word, atherfield.  Well, and what happened net?"

"Oh, she took her time over her tea and toast," continued atherfield.
"ery leisured in all her movements, I assure you.  At last she moved
off--of course I followed, casually and carelessly.  ow, as you may be
aware, outhampton West, where the train set us down, is a bit out of
the town, and I epected her to take a cab.  ut she didnt she walked
away from the station.  o did I--twenty or thirty yards in the rear.
he took her time it seemed to me she was purposely loitering.  It
struck me at last why--she was waiting until the business offices were
open.  I was right in that as soon as the town clocks struck nine she
uickened her pace and made a beeline for her objective.  And what do
you think that was?"

"o idea," said Hetherwick.

"White tar offices" answered atherfield.  "Went straight there, and
walked straight in  Of course, I waited outside, where she wouldnt
see me when she came out again.  he was in there about twenty minutes.
When she came out she turned to another part of the town.  And near
that old gateway, or bar, or whatever it is that stands across the
street, I lost her--altogether"

"ome eceptional reason, I should think, atherfield," remarked
Hetherwick.  "How was it?"

"y own stupid fault" growled atherfield.  "Took my eye off her in a
particularly crowded part--the town was beginning to get very busy.  I
just happened to let my attention be diverted--and she was gone  At
first I made certain shed gone into some shop.  I looked into
several--risky as that was--but I couldnt find her.  I hung about no
good.  Then I came to the conclusion that shed turned down one of the
side streets or alleys or passages--there were several about there--and
got clean away.  And after hanging around a bit, and going up one
street and down another--a poor job in our business at the best of
times and all dependent on mere luck--I decided to make a bold stroke
and be sure of at any rate something."

"What?  How?" asked Hetherwick.

"I thought Id find out what shed gone to the White tar offices for,"
replied atherfield.  "Of course, I didnt want to raise any suspicion
against her under the circumstances.  ut I flatter myself Im a bit of
a diplomatist, and I laid my plans.  I went in there, got hold of a
clerk who was a likely looking chap for secret keeping, told him who I
was and showed my credentials, and asked him for the information I
wanted.  I got it.  As luck would have it, my man had attended to her
himself and remembered her uite well.  Of course, little more than an
hour and a half had passed since shed been in there."

"And--what had she been in for?" asked Hetherwick.  "What did you hear?"

atherfield nodded significantly.

"ust what I epected to hear," he answered.  "hed booked a
second-class passage for ew ork in the Tartaric, sailing that
afternoon, in the name of H. unningham.  As soon as I found that out,
I knew I should come across her again--thered be no need to go raking
the town for her.  I ascertained that passengers would be allowed to go
aboard from two oclock the boat would sail between five and si.  o,
having once more admonished the clerk to secrecy and given him
plausible ecuses for my inuisitiveness, I went off to rela a bit,
and in due time sat down to an early and comfortable lunch--a man must
take his ease now and then, you know, r. Hetherwick."

"actly, atherfield--I uite agree," said Hetherwick.  "ut I dare
say your brain was at work, all the same, while you ate and drank?"

"It was, sir," assented atherfield.  "es--I made my plans.  I wasnt
going to ew ork, of course that was out of the uestion.  ut I was
going to have speech with her.  I decided that Id watch for her coming
aboard the Tartaric--being alone, shed probably come early.  I
proposed to get her aside, accosting her, of course, as ady
iversreade, tell her who I was and show my papers, and ask her if she
would give me any information about a certain r. yprian aseverie.  I
thought Id see how she took that before asking anything further if I
saw that she was taken aback, confused, and especially if she gave me
any prevaricating or elusive answer, Id ask her straight out if before
her marriage to the late ir ohn iversreade she was the rs.
Whittingham who, some ten years ago, stayed for a time at the White
Hart Hotel at ellithwaite.  And I practically made up my mind, too,
that if she admitted that and I saw good cause for it, Id detain her."

"ou meant to go as far as that?" eclaimed Hetherwick.

"I did  I should have been justified," replied atherfield.  "However,
thats neither here nor there, for I never saw her  I was down at the
point of departure well before two, and I assured myself that nobody
had gone aboard the Tartaric up to that time.  I kept as sharp a look
out as any man with only one pair of eyes could, right away from ten
minutes to two until five-and-twenty past five, when the boat sailed,
but she never turned up.  Of course youll say that she must have
slipped on unobserved by me, but Im positive she didnt.  o, sir
Its my opinion that she thought better of it and didnt go--forfeiting
her passage money, or a part of it, would be nothing to a woman of her
means--or that she was frightened at the last minute of showing herself
on that stage"

"rightened  Why?" asked Hetherwick.

atherfield laughed significantly.

"There were two or three of our men from cotland ard about," he
answered.  "Im not aware of what they were after I didnt ask em.
ut I did ask them to give me a hand in looking out for a lady whom I
fully described--which is why Im dead certain she never went aboard.
ow, it may have been that she came down there, knew--you never
know--some of those chaps and--made herself scarce  Anyway--I never
set eyes on her.  ever, in fact, saw her again after I lost her in the
morning.  o--thats where I am"

"ou came back--defeated?" remarked Hetherwick.

"Well, if you like to call it so," admitted atherfield.  "es, I came
back by the seven thirty-eight.  og tired  ut Im not through with
this yet, r. Hetherwick, and I want you to do something for me.  This
iss Hannaford, now, is down at iversreade ourt.  Theyll be on the
telephone there, of course.  I want you to ring her up early to-morrow
morning, and ask her if she can meet you on important private business
in orking town at noon.  Where shall we say?"

"White Horse would do," suggested Hetherwick.

"ery well--White Horse Hotel, at noon," agreed atherfield.  "Well go
down--for Ill go with you--by the . from ictoria.  ow please be
very careful about this, r. Hetherwick, when you telephone.  ont say
anything of any reason for going down to orking.  ont on any account
mention ady iversreade, in any way.  erely tell iss Hannaford that
you have urgent reasons for seeing her.  And--fi it up"

"Oh, I can fi it up all right," answered Hetherwick.  "iss Hannaford
can easily drive down from iversreade ourt.  ut I dont know what
you want her for."

"Wait till morning," replied atherfield, with a knowing look.  "oull
see.  Ill meet you at ictoria at ten oclock, sharp."




HAT I

I IT AAI?

Hetherwick was still in ignorance of the reason of atherfields desire
to see hona when, just before noon net day, atherfield and he walked
up from orking tation into the High treet, and made for the "White
Horse."  atherfield halted a few yards away from its door.

"ets wait outside for her," he said.  "Till Ive asked her a uestion
or two.  I dont want to even run the risk of being overheard."

hona came along in a car a few minutes later, and seeing the two men
advanced to meet them.  atherfield lost no time in getting to business.

"iss Hannaford," he said, with a cautious look round, and in a low
voice, "just tell me--is ady iversreade up there at the ourt?  he
is" he continued, as hona nodded.  "When did she come back, then?"

"ery early yesterday morning," answered hona promptly.  "y the .
from ictoria.  he was up at the ourt by .."

atherfield turned an utterly perpleed face on Hetherwick.  Then he
stared at hona.

"p at iversreade ourt at . yesterday--Tuesday--morning" he
eclaimed.  "Impossible  I saw her at outhampton at . yesterday
morning with my own eyes."

"Im uite sure you didnt" replied hona, with a satirical laugh.
"oure under some ueer mistaken impression, r. atherfield.  ady
iversreade was in her own house, here, with me at . yesterday
morning.  Thats a fact that I can vouch for"

The two men looked at each other.  ach seemed to be asking the other a
silent uestion.  ut atherfield suddenly voiced his, in tones full of
wonder and of chagrin.

"Then who on earth is that woman that I followed to outhampton?"

atherfields uestion went without answer.  hona, who had no idea of
what he was talking about, turned a surprised and inuiring look on
Hetherwick.  And Hetherwick saw that the time had come for a lot of
eplanation.

"ook here" he said.  "Weve got to do some talking, and we cant keep
iss Hannaford standing in the street.  ome into the hotel--well get
a private room for lunch, and then we can discuss matters all to
ourselves.  oure a bit puled by all this," he continued a few
minutes later, turning to hona when all three were safely closeted
together, and lunch had been ordered.  "And no wonder  ut Id better
tell you what atherfield and I were after on onday night, and what
atherfield was doing all yesterday.  ou see," he concluded, after
giving hona an epitomised account of the recent proceedings, "I was
absolutely certain that the woman whom we saw coming out of ivians on
onday night was the woman you pointed out to me on unday morning at
ictoria as ady iversreade--she was dressed in just the same things,
Im positive--in short Im convinced it was ady iversreade.  Then,
atherfield and I are both eually sure that that was the same woman we
saw coming out of t. arys ansions shortly before five oclock
yesterday morning, and whom atherfield followed to outhampton, p to
now, weve never had a doubt that it was ady iversreade--not a doubt"

"Well," said hona, with an incredulous laugh, "I cant say, of course,
that you didnt see ady iversreade come out of ivians on onday
night.  ady iversreade was certainly in town from unday noon to
yesterday morning, and she may have gone to ivians on onday night
for purposes of her own.  I know nothing about that.  ut I do know
that she was not in outhampton yesterday, for, as I told you, she was
back home at iversreade ourt, about half-past nine in the morning,
and shes never left the house since.  Thats plain fact"

"Its beyond me, then" eclaimed atherfield.  "And I say again, if
that wasnt ady iversreade that I tracked to outhampton, who was it?
Ill say more--if that really was ady iversreade that we saw coming
out of ivians, and followed to addington, and if she wasnt the
woman who came out of those flats yesterday morning, and that I went
after, well, then, ady iversreade has a double--who lives in t.
arys ansions  Thats about it"

"As regards that," remarked Hetherwick.  "I didnt tell you last night,
atherfield, that I went back yesterday to that house from which we
watched, and made some cautious inuiries about the tall, handsome
woman who has a flat opposite.  I got some information.  The woman whom
we followed there, and whom you were running after yesterday is known
there as a adame istorelle.  hes very little at her flat, though
punctual with its rent.  hes sometimes away altogether for long
periods--in fact, shes rarely seen there.  And shes believed to be
connected with the stage.  The caretaker who supplied this information
saw her at the flat on onday."

atherfield smacked one hand on the open palm of the other.

"Its an alias" he eclaimed.  "et your stars shes ady iversreade
Away from her flat for long periods?  Of course--because shes down
here, at her big house.  eeps that flat up for some purpose of her
own, and calls herself--what is it?--sounds rench."

"ut supposing thats so," remarked Hetherwick, with a sly glance at
hona.  "Its utterly impossible that ady iversreade could be at
iversreade ourt yesterday, and in outhampton at the same time
ome, now"

"Well, I tell you it beats me" muttered atherfield.  "I know what I
saw  If theres anything gone wrong, its your fault, r. Hetherwick
I dont know this ady iversreade  All I know is that you said the
woman we saw coming out of that club was ady iversreade.  That, sir,
is the woman I followed"

"The woman I saw coming out of ivians was the woman pointed out to me
by iss Hannaford as ady iversreade," affirmed Hetherwick uietly.
"Thats certain  ut----"

He was interrupted at this stage by the arrival of lunch.  othing more
was said until all three were seated, and the waiter had been sent
away.  Then hona looked at her companions and smiled.

"ou both seem to have arrived at a very promising stage" she said.
"At first I thought it a regular impasse, but----"

"Isnt it?" asked Hetherwick.  "At present I dont see any way through
or over it."

"Oh, I think youre getting towards something" she retorted.  "All
these things, puling as they are, are better than nothing.  Ive got
some news, too--if youre sure there are no eavesdroppers about."

"Oh, were all right" said Hetherwick.  "ood stout old doors,
these--close-fitting.  What net?"

hona leaned across the table a little, and lowered her voice.

"There was a sort of row at the ourt at least, at the Home,
yesterday," she said.  "With that man aseverie"

"Ah" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "Thats interesting  Tell about it."

"Well, I told you that ady iversreade arrived from ondon yesterday
morning about nine-thirty," continued hona.  "ajor enteney arrived
with her."

"Whos ajor enteney?" demanded atherfield.

"Hes a retired Army man whos greatly interested in ady iversreades
Home, and looks after its affairs in ondon," replied Hetherwick.  "And
iss Hannaford thinks hes in love with the foundress.  Ive seen
him--saw him with ady iversreade on unday.  es," he added, turning
to hona, "ajor enteney came back with her?  o on."

"As soon as they arrived--I saw them come, from my office window--they
came across to the Home," continued hona.  "It struck me that they
both looked unusually grave and serious.  They talked to me for a few
minutes on business matters then they went into ady iversreades
private office.  They were there for some little time then ady
iversreade came out and went away I saw her cross to the ourt.
resently ajor enteney came to me, and told me that he wanted to have
a little private talk with me.  He said--as near as I can
remember--iss eatherstone----"

atherfield looked up uickly from his plate.

"h?" he said.  "iss--eatherstone?"

"Thats the name iss Hannafords known by--there," said Hetherwick.
"Her mothers name.  I told you before, you know."

"True, true" assented atherfield, with a groan.  "ou did--I remember
now.  Im muddled--with yesterdays affair."

"iss eatherstone, hona went on--I believe youre aware that ady
iversreade has lately been visited--twice--by a man who called himself
r. yprian aseverie?

"es, I answered, I am, ajor enteney.  I saw r. aseverie on both
occasions.  Well, he said--I dont suppose you were at all
impressed by him? ot at all impressed, ajor enteney, I replied,
ecept very unfavourably.  idnt like his looks, eh, he asked with
a smile.  o you? I inuired.  Ive never seen the fellow, he
answered.  ut I epect to--this very morning.  Thats what I want to
talk to you about.  I believe hell turn up about noon--as, I
understand, he did before, wanting, of course, to see ady iversreade.
I want you to tell the doorkeeper, itchell, to bring him straight in
when he comes, and itchell is not to say that ady iversreade is not
in--she wont be in--hes to admit him immediately and you, if you
please, are to show him straight into the private office.  Instead of
finding ady iversreade there, hell find--me.  Is that clear?
erfectly clear, ajor enteney, I replied.  Ill see to it.
Well, theres something else, he said.  After I have had a little
plain-spoken talk with this fellow, I shall ring the bell.  I want you
to come in, and to bring itchell with you.  And--thats all, at
present.  ou understand?  I understand, ajor enteney, I answered.
Ill see to it.  ut as youve never seen this man theres one thing
Id like to say to you--hes the sort of man who looks as if he might
be dangerous.  He smiled at that.  Thank you, he said.  Im
prepared for that, iss eatherstone.  ou show him right in."

hona paused for a moment, to attend to the contents of her plate.  ut
Hetherwicks knife and fork had become idle so had atherfields each
man, it was plain, was becoming absorbed.  And atherfield suddenly
brightened, and gave Hetherwick an unmistakable wink.

"ood--good--good" he muttered, with something like a chuckle.  "Im
beginning to see a bit of daylight  cellent--when youre ready,
iss eatherstone----"

"Well," continued hona, after a few minutes pause, "about noon, r.
yprian aseverie drove up.  I had already given itchell his
instructions, and he brought aseverie straight into my office.
aseverie was evidently in the very best of spirits--he bowed and
grimaced at sight of me as if he epected to find me dying to see him.
I made no answer to his flowery greetings I just got up, ushered him
to the door of the private room, and closed it after him as he stepped
across the threshold.  Then I laughed--he wouldnt see who was awaiting
him until he got right into the room, and Id already gathered from
ajor enteney that his reception couldnt be eactly pleasant or
agreeable."

atherfield rubbed his hands together.

"ood--good" he chuckled.  "Wish Id been in that room"

"It wasnt long before I was there, r. atherfield," said hona.  "I
was, of course, tremendously curious to know what was going on there,
but the door fits closely, and I heard nothing--no angry voices or
anything.  However, in less than ten minutes the bell rang sharply.  I
called itchell--hes a big, strapping, very determined-looking
e-uardsman--and in we went.  I took everything in at a glance, ajor
enteney sat at ady iversreades desk.  On the blotting-pad, his
right hand close to it, lay a revolver----"

"Hah" eclaimed atherfield.  "To be sure  ust so  ine"

"Opposite the desk stood aseverie, staring first at ajor enteney,
then at us.  Its difficult for me to describe how he looked.  I think
the principal epression on his face was one of intense surprise."

"urprise?" ejaculated Hetherwick.

"urprise  Astonishment  He looked like a man who had just heard
something that he has believed it impossible to hear.  ut there was
also such a look of anger and rage--well, if ajor enteney hadnt had
that revolver close to his finger-ends, and if itchell hadnt been
there, I should have screamed and run.  However, it was not I who was
to do the running.  As soon as itchell and I entered, ajor enteney
spoke--very uietly.  He nodded at aseverie.  iss eatherstone and
you, itchell--you see this man?  If ever he comes here again, you,
itchell, will deny him entrance, and you, iss eatherstone, on
hearing from itchell that hes here, will telephone for the police
and, if he hangs about, will give him in charge.  Then he turned to
aseverie.  ow, my man he continued, pointing to the door.  ou
get out--uick  o  Of course, I looked at aseverie.  He stood
staring almost incredulously at ajor enteney.  It seemed to me that
he could scarcely believe his ears--he gave me the impression of being
unable to credit that he could be so treated.  ut he was also livid
with anger.  His fingers worked his eyes blaed it was dreadful to
see his lips.  He got out some words at last----"

"ive me the eact ones, if you can," interrupted atherfield.

"I can--Im not likely to forget them," said hona.  "He
said--What--you defy me, knowing what I know--knowing what I know"

"nowing what I know" muttered atherfield.  "nowing what he knew
m--and then?"

"Then ajor enteney just pointed to the door.  et out, I tell you
he said.  And look in the papers to-night.  e off"

"ook in the papers to-night, eh?" said atherfield.  "m--um  And
then, I suppose, he went?"

"He went without another word then," assented hona.  "itchell
escorted him out and saw him off.  ajor enteney looked at me when
hed gone.  There, iss eatherstone, he said, youve seen one of
the biggest scoundrels in ondon--or in urope.  ets hope youll
never see him again, that thats the end of him here.  I think hes had
his lesson  I made no answer, but I was jolly glad to see aseveries
car scooting away down the drive"

atherfield picked up the tankard of ale at his side and took a hearty
pull at its contents.  He set the tankard down again with an emphatic
bang.

"I know what this job is" he eclaimed triumphantly.  "lackmail"

"ust so" agreed Hetherwick.  "Ive been thinking that for the last
ten minutes.  aseverie has been endeavouring to blackmail ady
iversreade.  ut thats not our affair, you know.  What were after is
the solving of the mystery surrounding Hannafords death.  And--does
this look likely to fit in anywhere?"

"I should say it decidedly does look likely" answered atherfield.
"In my opinion its all of a piece at least, its a piece out of a
piece, one of many pieces, like a pule.  The thing is to put these
pieces together.  And there are two things we can try to do at once.
irst, find out more about this man aseverie the other, get hold of
more information about the lady in t. arys ansions."

"What about approaching ady iversreade for information--or ajor
enteney?" suggested Hetherwick.

"es--why dont you?" said hona, almost eagerly.  "o  Im a bit
tired of being there as iss eatherstone.  I want to tell ady
iversreade the truth, and all the whys and wherefores of it."

ut atherfield shook his head.  The time for that was not yet, he
declared let them wait awhile.  And after more conversation he and
Hetherwick returned to ondon.




HAT 

ATIO

The late afternoon edition of the evening papers were just out when
Hetherwick and atherfield reached ictoria.  atherfield snatched one
up a moment later he thrust it before Hetherwick, pointing to some big
black capitals.

"ood od" he eclaimed.  "ook at that"

Hetherwick looked, and gasped his astonishment at what he read.

   O OT HAAO.
  I THOA O WA.


Hetherwick turned on his companion with a look that was both
uestioning and surprised.

"This is probably--no, certainly--what enteney referred to when he
told aseverie to look in the newspapers" he said.  "That was
yesterday it must have been in last nights papers, and this
mornings.  I saw neither."

"Wait" said atherfield.  He hurried back to the bookstall and
returned with an armful of papers, turning the topmost over as he came.
"Its here--and here" he continued.  "ets get a uiet corner
somewhere and look this thing carefully over"

"ome into a waiting-room, then," said Hetherwick.  "Odd" he muttered,
as they turned away.  "Who should offer a reward--like that, too--who
isnt concerned in the case?"

"How do we know who isnt concerned in the case?" eclaimed
atherfield.  "omebody evidently is--somebody who can not only afford
to offer five thousand pounds, but isnt afraid to spend no end in
advertising.  ook at that--and that--and that," he went on, turning
over his purchases rapidly.  "Its in every paper in ondon"

"ets read it carefully," said Hetherwick.  He spread out one of the
newspapers on the waiting-room table and muttered the wording of the
advertisement while atherfield looked over his shoulder.  "ysterious,
very" he concluded.  "Whats it mean?"

ut atherfield was re-reading the advertisement.


Whereas obert Hannaford, formerly uperintendent of olice at
ellithwaite, orkshire, died suddenly in an nderground ailway train,
near haring ross mbankment tation about . a.m. on arch th
last, and epert medical investigation has proved that he was poisoned,
and there is evidence to warrant the belief that the poison was
administered by some person or persons with intent to cause his death,
this is to give notice that the above-mentioned sum of ive Thousand
ounds will be paid to anyone first giving information which will lead
to the arrest and conviction of the person or persons concerned in
administering the said poison and that such information should be given
to the undersigned, who will pay the said reward in accordance with the
above-stated conditions.

T, IO  T,
  olicitors.

April nd, .
  , incolns Inn ields,
    ondon, W..


atherfield pointed to the names of the signatories.

"enteney," he remarked.  "Thats the name of the man iss Hannaford
mentioned as having given aseverie his dismissal."

"Of course--ajor enteney," said Hetherwick.  "robably a junior
partner in the firm.  I know their names, but not much about them."

"I thought he was a soldier," said atherfield.  "ajor, she called
him."

"ery likely a Territorial officer," replied Hetherwick.  "Anyway, its
very plain what this is, atherfield, considering all we know.  This
advertisement has been issued on behalf of ady iversreade.  enteney,
lenkinsop  enteney are no doubt her solicitors.  ut--why?"

"Aye, why?" eclaimed atherfield.  "Thats just what beats me  What
interest has she in Hannafords murder?  Why should she want to bring
his murderer to justice?  If his granddaughter had offered, say, a
hundred pounds for information, I could understand it--shes his flesh
and blood.  ut ady iversreade  Why, if shes really the woman who
was once rs. Whittingham, youd have thought shed have been rather
glad that Hannaford was out of the way  And, after all, this maynt
come from her."

"Im absolutely certain it does," asserted Hetherwick.  "utting
everything together, what other conclusion can we come to?  It comes
from ady iversreade--and her adviser--ajor enteney, and its
something to do with that man aseverie.  ut--what?"

"It ought to be looked into," muttered atherfield.  "Theyve never
approached us on the matter.  Its a purely voluntary offer on their
part.  Theyve left the police clean out."

"Well, I make a suggestion," said Hetherwick.  "I think you and I had
better call at enteneys to-morrow morning.  We can tell them
something--perhaps theyll tell us something.  Anyway, its a foolish
thing to divide forces wed far better unite in a common effort."

"m" replied atherfield doubtfully.  "ut these lawyer chaps--theyve
generally got something up their sleeves--some card that they want to
play at their own moment.  However, we can try em."

"eet me at the south-east corner of incolns Inn ields at half-past
ten to-morrow morning," said Hetherwick.  "enteneys offices are close
by.  Well go together--and ask them straight out what this
advertisement means."

"All right--but if they wont tell?" suggested atherfield.

"Then, in that case, well introduce ady iversreades name, and ask
them if ady iversreade of iversreade ourt and rs. Whittingham,
formerly of ellithwaite, are one and the same person," replied
Hetherwick.  "ome  I think we can show them that we already know a
good deal."

"We have certainly a card or two to play," admitted atherfield.  "All
right, r. Hetherwick  To-morrow morning, then, as you suggest."

He was waiting at the appointed place when Hetherwick hurried up net
morning.  Hetherwick immediately turned him down the lower side of the
ields.

"Ive found out something about these people were going to see," he
said.  "y clerk, apperley, told me a bit hes a sort of walking
encyclopdia.  Old, highly respectable firm this.  enteney, senior, is
retired the firm is now really lenkinsop  enteney, junior.  And
enteney, junior, is the ajor enteney who takes such an interest in
ady iversreades Home--and in ady iversreade.  As I suggested last
night, he was a Territorial officer--so now hes back at his own job.
ow then, atherfield, lets arrange our plan of campaign.  ou, of
course, have your official credentials--Im a deeply interested person,
the man who chanced to witness Hannafords death.  I think youd better
be spokesman."

"Well, youll come in when wanted?" suggested atherfield.  "oure
better used to lawyers than I am, being one yourself."

"I fear my acuaintance with solicitors is, so far, etremely limited,
atherfield," replied Hetherwick with a laugh.  "I have seen a
brief--but only occasionally.  However, here we are at , and a
solid and sombre old house it is."

The two callers had to wait for some time before any apparent notice
was taken of their cards by the persons to whom they had been sent in.
atherfield was beginning to chafe when, at last, an elderly clerk
conducted them up to an inner room wherein one cold-eyed,
immobile-faced man sat at a desk, while another,, scarcely less stern
in appearance, in whom Hetherwick immediately recognised the ajor
enteney pointed out by hona, stood, hands in pockets, on the
hearthrug.  ach stared silently at the two callers the man at the
desk pointed to chairs on either side of his fortress.  He looked at
atherfield.

"es?" he asked.

"r. lenkinsop, I presume?" began atherfield, with a polite bow to
the desk.  "And r. enteney?" with another to the hearthrug.

"ust so," agreed lenkinsop.  "recisely  es?"

"ou have my card, gentlemen, and so you know who I am," continued
atherfield.  "The police----"

"A moment," interrupted lenkinsop.  He picked up Hetherwicks card and
glanced from it to its presenter.  "r. uy Hetherwick," he remarked.
"oes r. Hetherwick also call on behalf of the police?  ecause," he
added, with a dry smile, "I think Ive seen r. Hetherwick in wig and
gown."

"I am the man who was present at obert Hannafords death," said
Hetherwick.  "If you are conversant with the case----"

"uite--every detail" said lenkinsop.

"Then you know what I saw, and what evidence I gave at the inuest,"
continued Hetherwick.  "I have followed up the case ever since--and
thats why I am here."

"ot as amicus curi, then?" remarked lenkinsop with a still dryer
smile.  "oure not a disinterested adviser.  I see  And r.
atherfield--why is he here?"

"I was saying, r. lenkinsop, that the police have seen the
advertisement signed by your firm, offering five thousand pounds
reward--etcetera," answered atherfield.  "ow, I have this Hannaford
case in hand, and I can assure you Ive done a lot of work at it.  o,
in his way, has r. Hetherwick.  Were convinced that Hannaford was
murdered by poison, and that whoever poisoned him also poisoned the man
ranett at the same time.  ow, as either you or some person--a client,
I suppose--behind you is so much concerned in bringing Hannafords
murderer to justice as to offer a big sum for necessary information, we
think you must know a great deal, and I suggest to you, gentlemen, that
you ought to place your knowledge at our disposal.  I hope my
suggestion is welcome, gentlemen."

lenkinsop drummed the blotting-pad before him with the tips of his
fingers, and his face became more inscrutable than ever.  As for
enteney, he maintained the same attitude which he had preserved ever
since the visitors entered the room, lounging against the mantelpiece,
hands in pockets, and his eyes alternately fied on either Hetherwick
or atherfield.  There was a brief silence at last lenkinsop spoke
abruptly.

"I dont think we have anything to say," he said.  "What we have to say
has been said already in the advertisement.  We shall pay the offered
reward to the person who gives satisfactory information.  I dont think
that interferes with the police work."

"That doesnt help me much, r. lenkinsop," protested atherfield.
"ou, or your client, must know more than that  There must be good
reasons why your client should offer such a big sum as reward.  I think
we ought to know--more."

"I am not prepared to tell you more," answered lenkinsop.  "cept
that if we get the information which we think we shall get, we shall
not be slow to hand it over to the police authorities."

"That might be too late," urged atherfield.  "This is an intricate
case--there are a good many wheels within wheels."  Then, interpreting
a glance which he had just received from Hetherwick as a signal to go
further, he added "We know what a lot of wheels there are--no one
better  or eample, gentlemen, there is the curious fashion in which
this affair is mied up with ady iversreade"

In spite of their evidently habitual practice of self-control, the two
solicitors could not repress signs of astonishment.  lenkinsops face
fell enteney started out of his lounging attitude and stood upright.
And for the first time he spoke.

"What do you know about ady iversreade?" he demanded.

"A good deal, sir, but not so much as I intend to know," answered
atherfield firmly.  "ut I do know this--that Hannaford, just previous
to his sudden death, was in possession of a portrait of ady
iversreade, and believed her to be identical with a certain rs.
Whittingham who was through his hands on a charge of fraud, ten years
ago, at ellithwaite, in orkshire.  I, too, believe that this rs.
Whittingham is now ady iversreade, and I may tell you that Im in
full possession of all the facts relating to the ellithwaite
affair--an affair of obtaining a diamond necklace, worth about four
thousand pounds, by means of a worthless cheue, and----"

lenkinsop suddenly rose from his chair, holding up a hand.

"A moment, if you please" he said.  "enteney," he continued, turning
to his partner, "a word with you in your room."

atherfield glanced triumphantly after the retreating pair, and laughed
when a door had closed on them.

"Thats got em, r. Hetherwick" he eclaimed.  "They see that we know
more than they reckoned for.  In some way or other, it strikes me, this
advertisement is a piece of bluff"

"luff" said Hetherwick.  "What do you mean?"

"What I say," answered atherfield.  "luff  one to prevent somebody
from bringing up that old ellithwaite affair.  ay you a thousand to
one it is.  oull see these two lawyers will be more communicative
when they come back.  ow they shall talk--and well listen"

"If you have to do any more talking, atherfield," said Hetherwick,
"keep iss Hannafords name out of it.  hes in a rather awkward
position.  he went there, of course, to find out what she could, and
the results been that shes taken a fancy to ady iversreade, got a
genuine interest in the work there, and wants to stop.  it of a
bother, all that, and itll need some straightening out.  Anyway, keep
her name out of it here."

"As I say, sir, when these chaps come back to us, theyll do the
talking" answered atherfield, with a chuckle.  "oull see  If you
want to keep iss Hannafords name out, so do they want to keep ady
iversreades name out--I know the signs"

lenkinsop and enteney suddenly came back and seated themselves,
lenkinsop at his desk and enteney close by.  And lenkinsop
immediately turned to his callers.  His manner had changed he looked
now like a man who is anious to get a settlement of a difficult
uestion.

"We have decided to talk freely to you," he said at once.  "That means,
to tell you everything we know about this matter.  ou, r.
atherfield, as representing the police, will, of course, treat our
communication confidentially.  I neednt ask you, r. Hetherwick, to
regard all thats said here, as--you know  ow, to begin with--just
get one fact, an absolutely irrefutable fact, into your minds at once.
ady iversreade is not the woman who was known as rs. Whittingham at
ellithwaite ten years ago, nor did Hannaford believe that she was
either"

"What?" eclaimed atherfield.  "ut----" he turned to Hetherwick.
"ou hear that?" he went on.  "Why, we know----"

"et r. lenkinsop go on," said Hetherwick uietly.  "Hes eplaining,
I think."

"ust so," agreed lenkinsop.  "And Im beginning by endeavouring to
clear away a few mistaken ideas from your minds.  ady iversreade is
not rs. Whittingham.  Hannaford did not think she was rs.
Whittingham.  It was not ady iversreades portrait that Hannaford cut
out of the paper."

Hetherwick could not repress a start at that.

"Whose was it, then?" he demanded.  "or I certainly believed it was"

lenkinsop stooped and drew out a drawer from his desk.  rom a bundle
of documents he produced a newspaper, carefully folded and labelled.
Opening this, he laid it before the two visitors, pointing to a picture
marked with blue pencil.  And Hetherwick at once saw that here was a
duplicate of the portrait in his own pocket-book.  ut there was this
important difference--while Hannaford had cut away the lettering under
his picture, it was there in the one which lenkinsop ehibited.  He
started again as he read it--adame Anita istorelle.

"Thats the picture which Hannaford cut out of the paper," said
lenkinsop.  "It is not that of ady iversreade."

"Then its that of a woman whos her double" eclaimed atherfield.
"Ill lay anything that if you asked a hundred men whove seen ady
iversreade if thats her picture, theyd swear it is"

"I see," said Hetherwick, disregarding his companions outburst, "that
this purports to be a portrait of a adame istorelle, who is described
in the accompanying letterpress as a famous connoisseur of precious
stones.  ow, in relation to what were discussing, may I ask a plain
uestion?  Who is adame istorelle?"

lenkinsop smiled--oracularly.

"adame istorelle," he replied, "is the twin sister of ady
iversreade"




HAT I

TI O

lenkinsops sudden announcement, not altogether unepected by
Hetherwick as a result of the last few minutes proceedings, seemed to
strike atherfield with all the force of a lightning-like illumination.
His mouth opened his eyes widened he turned on Hetherwick as if,
having been lost for a while in a baffling mae, he had suddenly seen a
way pointed out to him.

"Oh, thats it, is it?" he eclaimed.  "A twin sister, eh?  Then--but
go on, r. lenkinsop Im beginning to see things."

"The matter is doubtless puling--to outsiders," responded lenkinsop.
"To clear it up, I shall have to go into some family history.  ady
iversreade and adame istorelle are, I repeat, twin sisters.  They
are the daughters of a man who in his time was captain of various
merchant ships--the old sailing ships--and who knocked about the world
a good deal.  He married an American woman, and his two daughters were
born in alveston, Teas.  They were educated in America--but theres
no need to go into the particulars of their early lives----"

"Theres a certain particular that I should like to have some
information about, if you please," interrupted Hetherwick.  "The rs.
Whittingham who was at ellithwaite ten years ago had the figure of a
snake tattooed round a wrist, in various colours.  he wore a black
velvet band to cover it.  ow----"

lenkinsop turned to his partner with a smile.

"I thought that would come up," he said.  "Well r. Hetherwick, if you
want to know about that matter, both sisters are tattooed in the same
fashion.  That was a bit of work of the old sea-dog, their father--a
fancy, and a very foolish one, of his.  He had the children tattooed in
that way when they were uite young, much to their disgust when they
grew older.  ach lady wears a covering velvet armlet--as I know."

"roceed, if you please," said Hetherwick.  "Thats cleared up"

"I gather that youve been making inuiries on your own account,"
observed lenkinsop.  "Well, since were determined to tell you
everything, well be as good as our word.  o lets come to the
ellithwaite affair.  ouve probably heard only one version--you may
have got it from Hannaford you may have got it from old newspapers
you may have got it on the spot--its immaterial to us.  ut you
havent heard the version of the lady who was then rs. Whittingham.
That puts a rather different compleion on things.  or reasons of her
own, with which weve nothing to do, rs. Whittingham--her proper and
legal name at that time--stayed at ellithwaite for a while.  he had
various transactions with a jeweller there eventually she bought from
him a diamond necklace at a price--three thousand nine hundred pounds.
he gave him a cheue for the amount, fully epecting that by the time
it reached her bankers in anchester certain funds for her credit would
have reached them from America.  There was a hitch--the funds didnt
arrive--the cheue was returned.  The jeweller approached the
police--Hannaford, their superintendent there, got out a warrant and
tracked down rs. Whittingham.  He arrested her, and she got away from
him, left ngland, and returned to America.  or some time she was in
financial straits.  ut she did not forget her liabilities, and
eventually she sent the ellithwaite jeweller the agreed price of the
diamond necklace, and eight years interest at five per cent. on the
amount.  he holds his formal receipt for the money she sent him.  o
much for that episode--whether Hannaford ever knew of the payment or
not, I dont know.  We are rather inclined to believe that he didnt.
ut--the necklace was paid for, and paid for handsomely."

"I may as well say that Im aware of that," remarked Hetherwick.  "I
have been informed of the fact at first hand."

"ery good.  I see you have been at ellithwaite," said lenkinsop with
another of his shrewd smiles.  "ow then, we come to what is far more
pertinent--recent events.  The situation as regards ady iversreade
and adame istorelle some little time ago--say, when Hannaford came to
town--was this ady iversreade, widow of ir ohn iversreade, had
inherited his considerable fortune, was settled at iversreade ourt in
urrey, and had founded a Home for wounded officers close by, of which
my friend and partner, ajor enteney there, is ondon representative.
Her sister, adame istorelle, had a flat at addington and another in
ew ork.  he was chiefly in ew ork, but she was sometimes in ondon
and sometimes in aris.  As a matter of fact, adame istorelle is an
epert in precious stones, and a dealer in them.  ut she has recently
become engaged to be married to a well-known peer, an elderly, very
wealthy man--which possibly has a good deal to do with what I am going
to tell you."

"robably, I think, lenkinsop--not possibly," suggested enteney.
"robably--decidedly."

"robably, then--probably" assented lenkinsop.  He leaned forward
across his desk towards the two listeners.  "ow, gentlemen, your
closest attention, for Im coming to the really important points of
this matter--those that affect the police particularly.  About a
fortnight ago ady iversreade, being in her private office at her
home, close by iversreade ourt, was waited upon by a man who sent in
a card bearing the name of r. yprian aseverie.  ady iversreade
thought that the presenter of this card was some medical man who wished
to inspect the Home, and he was admitted to see her.  he soon found
out that he had come on no such errand as she had imagined.  He told
her a strange tale.  He let her know, to begin with, that he was fully
conversant with that episode in her sisters life which related to
ellithwaite and the diamond necklace.  ady iversreade, who knew all
about it, felt that the mans information had been gained at first
hand.  He also let her know that adame istorelles whereabouts and
engagement were familiar to him in short, he showed that he was well
up in the present family history, both as regards ady iversreade and
her sister.  Then he let his hand be seen more plainly.  He told ady
iversreade that a certain gang of men in ondon had become acuainted
with the facts of the ellithwaite matter, the warrant, the arrest, the
escape, and that they were also aware of adame istorelles engagement
to ord--we will leave his name out at present, or refer to him as ord
--and that they wanted a price for their silence.  In other words,
they were determined on blackmail.  If they were not paid their price,
they were going to ord , with all the facts, to tell him that he was
engaged to a woman who, as they would put it, was still liable by the
law of the land to arrest and prosecution for fraud."

"Isnt she?" asked atherfield suddenly.  "o time-limit in these sort
of cases, I think, r. lenkinsop.  iable ten or twenty or thirty
years after--I think"

"Ive already said that the ellithwaite affair was one of account,"
replied lenkinsop.  "There was no intent to defraud, and the full
amount and interest on it was duly paid.  ut thats not the
point--were dealing with the presentment of this to ady iversreade
by the man aseverie.  Of course, ady iversreade didnt know how the
law might be, and she was alarmed on her sisters account.  he asked
aseverie what he wanted.  He told her plainly then that he could
settle these men--if she would find the money.  He had, he said, a
certain hold over them which he could use to advantage.  ady
iversreade wanted to know what that hold was he wouldnt tell her.
he then wanted to know how much the men wanted he wouldnt say.  What
he did say was that if she would be prepared to find the money to
silence them, he, during the net week, would eert pressure on them to
accept a reasonable amount, and would call on her on the following
riday and tell her what they would take.  he made that appointment
with him."

"And, I hope, took advice in the meantime," muttered atherfield.
"Ought to have handed him over there and then"

"o--she took no advice in the meantime," continued lenkinsop.
"adame istorelle was in aris--ajor enteney was away on business in
the country.  ady iversreade awaited aseveries net coming.  When
he came he told her what his gang wanted--thirty thousand pounds.  He
specified, too, the way in which it was to be paid--in a fashion which
would have prevented the payment being traced to the people who
received it.  ut now ady iversreade was more prepared--she had had
time to think.  he epected ajor enteney net day she also knew
that her sister would return from aris on the following onday.  o
she told aseverie that she would give him an answer on onday evening
if he would make an appointment to meet her at some place in ondon.
ventually they made an appointment at ivians, in andlestick
assage.  aseverie went away net day ady iversreade told ajor
enteney all that had happened.  As a result, he went with her to
ivians on onday evening.  They waited an hour beyond the fied time.
aseverie made no appearance----"

"ust so" muttered atherfield.  "He wouldnt--the ajor being there"

"erhaps," assented lenkinsop.  "Anyway, he didnt materialise.  o
ady iversreade went away, leaving ajor enteney behind her.  I may
say that he stopped there for some further time, keeping a sharp
look-out for the man whom ady iversreade had described in detail--a
remarkable man in appearance, I understand.  ut he never saw him."

"o" eclaimed atherfield cynically.  "Of course he didnt  ut she
would ha done--if shed gone alone"

"Well, there it was," continued lenkinsop.  "ow for ady iversreade.
he drove to her sisters flat in addington, and found adame
istorelle just returned from aris.  he told her all that had
happened.  adame istorelle determined to go to ew ork at once and
get certain papers from her flat there which would definitely establish
her absolute innocence in the ellithwaite affair.  eaving ady
iversreade in the flat, adame istorelle set off for outhampton
before five oclock net morning--yes?"

atherfield, uttering a deep groan, smote his forehead.

"Aye" he muttered.  "ust so  To be sure  ut go on--go on, sir."

"ou seem to be highly surprised," said lenkinsop.  "However--at
outhampton she booked a passage in a name she always used when
travelling--her maiden name--by the Tartaric, sailing that afternoon.
That done, she went to a hotel for lunch.  Then she began to think
things over more calmly.  And in the end, instead of sailing for ew
ork, she went back, cancelled her booking, and set off by train to
ord s country seat in Wiltshire, and told him the whole story.  he
wired to her sister as to what she had done, and in the evening wrote
to her.  eanwhile, ady iversreade had returned, early in the
morning, to iversreade ourt.  ajor enteney went with her.  He was
confident that aseverie would turn up.  He did turn up  ut he did
not see ady iversreade.  He saw ajor enteney--alone.  And ajor
enteney, after a little plain talk to him, metaphorically kicked him
out, and told him to do his worst.  He went--warned that if ever he
showed himself there again he would be handed over to the police."

atherfield groaned again, but the reason of his distress was obviously
of a different nature.

"A mistake, sir--a great mistake" he eclaimed, shaking his head at
enteney.  "ou shouldnt have let that fellow go like that  ou
should have handed him over there and then.  o?  ou dont know where
he may be"

"Oh, well, were not uite such fools as we seem, atherfield," he
replied.  "When I went down to orking with ady iversreade on Tuesday
morning I had with me a smart man whom I can trust.  He saw aseverie
arrive he saw aseverie leave.  I think we shall be able to put our
fingers on aseverie at any moment.  Our man wont lose sight of him"

"Oh, well, thats better, sir, thats much better" said atherfield.
"Thats all right  A chap like that should be watched night and day.
ut now, gentlemen, about this reward  our notion of offering it
sprang, of course, from this aseverie business.  ut--how, eactly?
id he mention Hannaford to ady iversreade?"

"o" replied lenkinsop.  "Ill tell you how we came to issue the
advertisement.  All unday afternoon and evening, and for some time on
onday morning, ady iversreade, ajor enteney, and myself were in
close consultation about this affair.  Ill tell you at once how and
why we connected it with the poisoning of Hannaford, of which, of
course, all of us had read in the newspapers."

"Aye--how, now?" asked atherfield.

"ecause of this," answered lenkinsop.  He tapped his desk to
emphasise his words, watching atherfield keenly as he spoke.  "ecause
of this aseverie told ady iversreade that the gang of blackmailers
had in their possession the original warrant for rs. Whittinghams
arrest"

Hetherwick felt himself impelled to jump in his chair, to eclaim
loudly.  He repressed the inclination, but atherfield was less
reserved.

"Ah" he eclaimed sharply.  "Ah"

"aseverie made a false step there," continued lenkinsop.  "He should
never have told that.  ut he did--no doubt he thought a rich woman
easy prey.  ow, of course, when we came to consult, we knew all about
the ellithwaite affair we knew, too, that Hannaford was
superintendent at the time and that he had the warrant it was not at
all improbable that he had preserved it in his pocket-book, and had it
on him when he came to ondon.  What, then, was the obvious
conclusion--that the men who now held that warrant had got it, probably
by foul means, from Hannaford, and were concerned in his murder?
And--more than that--did the gang of which aseverie spoke really
eist?  Wasnt it likely that the gang was--aseverie?"

"Aye" muttered atherfield.  "Ive been thinking of that"

"et," said lenkinsop, "it was on the cards that there might be a
gang.  We searched all the newspapers accounts thoroughly.  We found
that net to no information could be got as to Hannafords movements
between the time of his arrival in ondon and the night of his death.
The one man who might have given more information about Hannafords
doings on the evening preceding his death--ranett--was dead, evidently
poisoned, as Hannaford was poisoned.  These were circumstances--theyve
probably occurred to both of you--which led us to believe that
Hannaford had formed the acuaintance of folk here in town who were of
a shady sort.  And one thing was absolutely certain--if the gang, or if
aseverie, had really got that warrant, they had got it from Hannaford
h?"

"That may be taken as certain," assented Hetherwick.  "ither directly
or indirectly, it must have been from him."

"We think they, or he, got it directly from him," said lenkinsop.
"Our theory is that if there is a gang aseverie is an active, perhaps
the leading, member that Hannaford was previously acuainted with him
or some other member that Hannaford was with him or them on the
evening preceding his death that he jokingly told them that he had
discovered the identity of adame istorelle with rs. Whittingham and
that they poisoned him--and ranett, as being present--in order to keep
the secret to themselves and to blackmail adame istorelle and her
sister, ady iversreade.  Thats our general idea--and thats why, on
onday noon, we issued the advertisement.  We meant to keep things to
ourselves at first, and if substantial evidence came, to pass it over
to the police.  ow you know everything.  It may be, if there is a
gang, that one member will turn traitor for the sake of five thousand
pounds and if he can eculpate himself satisfactorily it may be, too,
that matters will develop until were in a position to fasten things on
aseverie----"

"I still wish that either ady iversreade or ajor enteney had handed
him over to custody" said atherfield.  "ou see----"

"ouve got to remember that aseverie never demanded anything for
himself," interrupted enteney.  "He represented himself as a
go-between.  ut our mans safe enough--a retired detective, and----"

ust then a clerk opened the door and entered with a telegram.
lenkinsop tore open the envelope, glanced hurriedly at the message and
flung the form on his desk with an eclamation of annoyance.

"This is from our man" he said.  "ent from over.  ollowed aseverie
down there--and aseveries slipped him"




HAT II

TH TO A

enteney strode forward and picked up the telegram a moment later he
passed it over to Hetherwick.

"Thats most unfortunate" he eclaimed.  "And unepected, too  Of
course, the fellows slipped off to the ontinent."

atherfield looked over Hetherwicks shoulder and read the message.


"ollowed him down here last night.  ut up at same hotel, but he
slipped me and got clear away early this morning.  eturning now."


"ou should have employed two men, gentlemen," said atherfield.
"Ones not enough--in a case of that sort.  ut its as I said
before--this man should have been given into custody at once.
However----"

He got up from his chair, as if there was no more to be said, and moved
towards the door.  ut half-way across the room he paused.

"oull let me know if anybody comes forward about that reward?" he
suggested.  "Its more of a police matter, you know."

The two partners, who were obviously much annoyed by the telegram,
nodded.

"We shall let you know--at once," answered lenkinsop.  "Of course,
youll regard all weve told you as strictly confidential?"

"Oh, to be sure, sir," replied atherfield.  "Its not the only private
and confidential feature of this affair, I assure you."

Outside he turned to Hetherwick.

"Well" he said.  "Weve cleared up a few things, r. Hetherwick--or,
rather, those two have cleared them up for us.  ut are we any nearer
answering the uestion that we want answering--who poisoned obert
Hannaford?"

"I think we are" replied Hetherwick.  "I am, anyhow  ither aseverie
poisoned him--or he knows who did"

"nows who did" repeated atherfield.  "Ah--thats more like it.  I
dont think he did it--he wouldnt be so ready about showing himself
forward."

"Im not so sure of that," remarked Hetherwick.  "rom what weve heard
of him, he seems to be a bold and daring sort of scamp.  robably he
thought hed have a very easy prey in ady iversreade probably, too,
he believed that a woman whos got all that money would make little to
do about parting with thirty thousand pounds.  One things sure,
however--aseverie knows what we want to know.  And--hes gone"

"erhaps--perhaps" said atherfield.  "And perhaps not.  This man of
enteneys no doubt tracked him to over, and there he lost him, but
that isnt saying that aseveries gone on the ontinent.  If
aseveries the cute customer that he seems to be, hed put two and two
together when ajor enteney warned him off iversreade ourt.  Hed
probably suspect enteney of setting a watch on him he may have
spotted the very man who was watching.  Then, if hed any sense, hed
lead that man a bit of a dance, and eventually double on him.  o--I
should say aseveries back here in town  Thats about it, r.
Hetherwick.  ut whats this?  Heres one of my men coming to meet us.
I left word where I should be found."

Hetherwick looked up and saw a man, who was obviously a policeman in
plain clothes, coming towards them.  He was a uiet-looking,
stodgy-faced man, but he had news written all over his plain face.

"Well, arler?" inuired atherfield as they met.  "ot something?"

There was nobody about in that uiet corner of incolns Inn ields,
yet the man looked round as if anious to escape observation, and he
spoke in a whisper.

"I believe Ive got that chemist" he answered.  "eastways, its like
this.  Theres a chemist I tried this morning--name of acpherson, in
aiden ane.  I showed him the facsimiles of the lost labels on the
medicine bottles, and asked him if he could give me any information.
Hes a very cautious sort of man, I think he eamined the facsimiles a
long time, saying nothing.  Then he said he supposed I was a policeman,
and so on, and of course I had to tell him a bit--only a bit.  Then he
said, all of a sudden, ook here, my friend, he said, youd better
tell me, straight out--has this to do with that Hannaford poisoning
case?  o, of course, I said that, between ourselves, it had.  Isnt
atherfield in charge of that? he said.  Of course, I said you were.
ery well he said.  ou send atherfield to me.  Im not going to
say anything to you, he said.  What Ive got to say Ill say to
atherfield.  o I went back to head-uarters, and they told me youd
gone to incolns Inn ields."

"All right, my lad" said atherfield.  "If youve found the right man,
Ill remember you.  Whats his name--acpherson, aiden ane?  ery
good--then Ill just step along and see him.  ot a word to anybody,
arler" he added, as the man turned away.  "eep close.  ow, this is
a bit of all right, r. Hetherwick" he continued, chuckling and
rubbing his hands.  "This beats all we heard at enteneys  Only let
me get the name and address of the man for whom that bottle of medicine
was made up, and I think I shall have taken a long stride  ut come
along--well see the chemist together."

The shop in aiden ane before which they presently paused was a small,
narrow-fronted, old-fashioned establishment, with little in its windows
beyond the usual coloured bottles and over the front no more than the
name "acpherson" in faded gilt letters on a time-stained signboard.
It was dark and stuffy within the shop, and Hetherwick had to strain
his eyes to see a tall, thin, elderly, spectacled man, very precise and
trim in appearance, who stood behind the single counter, silently
regarding him and atherfield.

"r. acpherson?" inuired atherfield.  "ust so  ood morning, sir.
y name is atherfield--Inspector atherfield.  One of my men tells
me----"

"One moment" interrupted the chemist.  He stepped behind a screen at
the rear of his shop and presently returned with a young man, to whom
he whispered a word or two.  Then he beckoned to his two visitors, and
opening a door at the further corner, ushered them into a private
parlour.  "We shall be to ourselves here, r. atherfield," he said.
"And Ive no doubt your business is of a highly confidential nature."

"omething of that sort, r. acpherson," assented atherfield, as he
and Hetherwick took chairs at a centre table.  "ut my manll have
prepared you a bit, no doubt.  He tells me he showed you the
photographed facsimiles of certain torn labels that are on a medicine
bottle which figures in the Hannaford case, and that in conseuence of
your seeing them you asked to see me.  Well, sir, here I am"

"Aye, just so, r. atherfield, just so, precisely," replied the
chemist, turning up the gas-jet which hung above the table.  "Aye, to
be sure"  He, too, sat down at the table, and folded his thin long
fingers together.  "Aye, and youll be thinking, r. atherfield, that
yon bottle has something to do with the poisoning of Hannaford?"

"Ill be candid with you, r. acpherson," answered atherfield.  "ut
first let me ask you something.  Have you read the newspaper accounts
of this affair?"

"Ive done that, r. atherfield--yes, all I could lay hands on."

"Then youll be aware that there was another man poisoned as well as
Hannaford--a man named ranett, who was in Hannafords company on the
night when it all happened?  This gentleman here is the one that was in
the nderground train and saw Hannaford die, and ranett make off, as
he said, to fetch a doctor."

"Thatll be r. Hetherwick, Im thinking," said the chemist, with a
polite bow.  "Aye, just so"

"I see youve read the reports of the inuest," remarked atherfield,
with a smile.  "ery well, as I say, ranett was found dead later.  I
discovered a medicine bottle and a glass at his bedside.  Thered been
whisky in both, but according to the medical eperts there had also
been poison--the traces, they say, were indisputable.  ow, on that
medicine bottle were two torn labels--on the upper one, as you see from
the facsimile photograph, theres been a name written--all thats left
is the initial . and the first letter of a surname, A.  All the rests
gone.  And what I want to know is--are you the chemist that made up the
medicine or the tonic, or whatever it was, that was in that bottle,
and, if so, who is the customer for whom you made it, and whose
hristian name begins with . and surname with A.?  o you comprehend
me?"

"Aye, aye, r. atherfield" answered the chemist eagerly.  "Im
appreciating every word youre saying, and very lucid it all is.  And
Im willing to give you all the information in my power, but first Id
just like to have a bit myself on a highly pertinent matter.  ow,
youll be aware, r. atherfield, if youve seen the newspapers of this
last day or two, that theres a firm of solicitors in incolns Inn
ields thats offering a reward of five thousand pounds----"

"Im well enough aware of it, r. acpherson," interrupted atherfield
with a laugh and a sly glance at Hetherwick.  "r. Hetherwick and
myself have just come straight from their office, and what you want to
know is--if you give me information will it be the same thing as giving
it to them?  ou want to make sure about the reward?"

"recisely, r. atherfield, precisely" assented the chemist eagerly.
"ouve hit my meaning eactly.  or, of course, when theres a reward
like yon----"

"If you give us information, r. acpherson, thatll lead to the arrest
and conviction of the guilty party, you can rest assured youll get
that reward," said atherfield.  "And r. Hetherwickll support me in
that, Im sure."

"Im satisfied--Im satisfied, gentlemen" eclaimed acpherson, as
Hetherwick murmured his confirmation.  "Well, its a strange, black
business, and Id no idea that I would come to be associated with it
until that man of yours called in this morning, r. atherfield.  ut
then I knew  And Ill shorten matters by telling you, at once--I made
up the tonic that was in that bottle"

atherfield rubbed his hands.

"ood" he said uietly.  "ood  And now, then--the critical uestion
or whom?"

"or a r. harles Ambrose, from a prescription of his own," replied
acpherson.  "Its a sort of pick-me-up tonic.  I first made it up for
him two years ago Ive made it up for him several times since.  The
last occasion was about si weeks ago.  I have all the dates, though,
in my books I can show you them."

"Wait a bit," said atherfield.  "Thats of no great importance--yet.
r. harles Ambrose, eh?  Have you his address?"

"Aye, to be sure" answered the chemist.  "His address is , umber
, ohn treet."

"Adelphi" suggested atherfield.

"Adelphi, precisely--, umber , ohn treet, Adelphi," repeated
acpherson.  "Thats in the books, too."

atherfield suddenly became silent, staring at the floor.  When he
looked up again it was at Hetherwick.

"idnt ranett eclaim that he knew of a doctor, close by, when he
rushed out of that train at haring ross nderground?" he asked.
"ave the impression that he knew of one close by, anyway?"

"He said distinctly close by," answered Hetherwick.  "Why, are you
thinking----"

atherfield interrupted him with a wave of the hand, and turned again
to the chemist.  "ouve seen this r. harles Ambrose?" he asked
abruptly.

"Oh, I have, r. atherfield, many a time and often," replied
acpherson.  "ut now I come to think of it, not lately."

"When--last?" demanded atherfield.

"I should think last when he called in and told me to make him another
bottle of his tonic," answered acpherson, after some thought.  "As I
said just now, perhaps about si weeks ago.  ut the books----"

"ever mind the books yet.  Whats this r. harles Ambrose like?"

"A tall, handsome man, distinguished-looking--I should say about forty
years of age.  A dark man--hair, eyes, beard.  He wears his moustache
and beard in--well, a sort of foreign fashion in fact, hes more like
a paniard than an nglishman."

"ut--is he an nglishman?"

"He was always taken by me for an nglishman he speaks like one--that
is, like an nglishman of the upper classes.  He once told me he was an
Oford man--wed been talking about universities."

"Well-dressed man?"

"Aye, he was that  A smart, fine man."

"id you ever see him in a big, dark overcoat, with a large white silk
muffler about his neck and the lower part of his face?"

"Aye, Ive seen him like that  On chilly evenings.  Indeed, thats
another thing he told me--he was subject to bronchial attacks."

"uffled himself well up, eh?" suggested atherfield.

"Aye, just so  Hes been in here like that."

atherfield turned to Hetherwick with a significant glance.

"Thats the man who met Hannaford at ictoria tation that night--the
man that edbitter saw, and that nobodys seen since" he eclaimed.
"A million to one on it  ow then, who is he?"

"ou know his name and his address," remarked Hetherwick.

"es--and I know, too, that r. acpherson here hasnt seen him
lately" retorted atherfield dryly.  "How often, now, r. acpherson,
did you use to see him?  I mean, did you use to see him at other times
than when he came into your shop?"

"Oh, yes  Ive seen him in the street, outside," replied the chemist.
"Ive seen him, too, going in and out of ules, and in and out of
omanos."

"In other words," remarked atherfield, "he was pretty well known about
this end of the trand.  Im not sure, now, that I dont remember such
a man myself--black, silky, carefully-trimmed beard, always a big
swell.  ut--r. acpherson hasnt seen him lately  Hm  o you know
if he was in practice, r. acpherson?"

"I could not say as to that, r. atherfield.  eeing that he called
himself r. Ambrose, I supposed he was a medical practitioner, but I
dont know what his degrees or ualifications were at all."

atherfield glanced at a row of books which stood over a desk at the
side of the parlour.

"Have you got an up-to-date medical directory?" he asked.  "ood
ets look the man up.  ou turn up his name, r. Hetherwick," he went
on as the chemist handed down a volume "youre more used to books than
I am.  ind out if theres anything about him."

Hetherwick turned over the pages of the directory, and presently shook
his head.

"Theres no harles Ambrose here," he said.  "ook for yourselves."

atherfield glanced at the place indicated and said nothing.
acpherson made an eclamation of surprise.

"Aye, well, he may be a foreigner, after all," he observed.  "ut I
shouldnt have considered him one, and he certainly told me he was an
Oford graduate."

"oreigner or Oforder, Im going to know more about him" declared
atherfield, rising and grasping his stick with an air of
determination.  "Well, r. acpherson, were obliged to you, and if
this results in anything--you know  ut for the moment--a bit of that
caution that you cotsmen are famous for--eh?"

Outside, atherfield laid his hand on Hetherwicks elbow.

"r. Hetherwick," he said solemnly, "were on the track--at last  ure
as my names atherfield, weve hit the trail  ow were going to ohn
treet, Adelphi--and Ill lay you anything you like that the mans
vanished"




HAT III

TH TA

Hetherwick followed his companion across the trand, into the Adelphi,
and to the house they wanted--an old Adams mansion, now divided into
flats.  atherfield did not take the trouble to ascend to the upper
regions he sought and found a caretaker and put a uestion to him.
The man shook his head.

"r. Ambrose, sir?" he replied.  "Oh, yes, r. Ambrose lives here--.
ut he aint in, sir--aint at home, in fact.  Hes been away three
weeks or so--dont know where he is."

With a meaning look at Hetherwick, atherfield drew the caretaker aside
and talked to him for a few moments the man presently turned and went
downstairs to the basement from which they had summoned him.

"Thats all right," remarked atherfield, with a wink.  "Hes going to
let us into Ambroses flat.  idnt I tell you we shouldnt find
Ambrose here?  ot he  I should say hes off"

"upposing he returns--while were here?" asked Hetherwick.

"Wish he would" chuckled atherfield.  "obody I want to see more  If
he did, why, I should just ask him to take a little walk with me--to
eplain a few matters.  ut he wont  Heres the man.  Well go up."

The caretaker reappeared with a bunch of keys and led the way to a flat
at the top of the old house.  He unlocked a door and stood aside.

"ou neednt wait," said atherfield.  "Ill shut the place up again
when we leave and let you know.  All right."

He walked in, with Hetherwick at his heels, as soon as the caretaker
had gone, and, once inside, closed the door carefully upon himself and
his companion.  ut Hetherwick, after a first glance at the
sitting-room into which they had entered, a somewhat untidy, shabbily
furnished place, went straight to the hearth and pointed to a framed
photograph, time-stained and faded, which hung over the mantelpiece.

"Theres a striking and significant piece of evidence--at once" he
eclaimed.  "o you know what that is, atherfield?"

atherfield looked in the direction indicated, and shook his head.

"ot the slightest idea" he answered.  "I see its a photograph of
some old church or other--thats all."

"Thats the famous arish hurch of ellithwaite" said Hetherwick.
"One of the very finest in ngland  I had a look at it--only a mere
look--when I was down there.  ow then, whats this man doing with a
picture of ellithwaite arish hurch in his rooms?  Hannaford came
from ellithwaite"

"Thats a mighty significant thing, anyway," agreed atherfield.
"Were getting at something this morning" He looked more carefully at
the photograph.  "rand old building, as you say," he continued.  "Of
course, the mere fact of his having it put up there shows that hes
some interest in it.  ellithwaite man, likely.  ut well find all
that out.  ow lets look round."

There was little to see, Hetherwick thought.  The flat consisted of a
sitting-room and bedroom and a small bathroom.  The furniture was
plain, old, rather shabby the whole place suggested that its occupant
was not over well-to-do the only signs of affluence to be seen were
manifested in the toilet articles on the dressing-table, in a
luurious, if well-worn, dressing-gown which hung on the rail of the
bed, and in the presence of carefully folded and pressed garments laid
out in the bedroom.  There were a few books, chiefly medical treatises,
in shelves in the sitting-room a few personal pictures, mainly of
college and school groups, on the walls and a desk in the centre,
littered with more books, writing materials, and papers.  atherfield
began to turn them over.

"ee that?" he eclaimed suddenly, pointing to a movable calendar which
stood on the top ledge of the desk.  "otice the date?  arch th
Thats the day on which Hannaford got his uietus.  At least, strictly
speaking, it was the day before.  Hannaford actually died on the
nineteenth--about--what was it?--very early in the morning, anyway.
Whats one to gather from this?--that Ambrose hasnt been here since
the eighteenth.  o--hallo"

Turning over the loose papers that lay about the blotting-pad, he had
suddenly lighted upon a telegram just as suddenly he thrust it into
Hetherwicks hands.

"ook at that" he eclaimed.  "ow, that is a find  iggest weve
ever had--so far"

Hetherwick read the apparently innocent message.


"All right.  Will meet you ictoria bookstall this evening as
suggested.

"Hannaford."


"ee the date?" said atherfield ecitedly.  "arch th  ow weve
got at it  Ambrose was the man that met Hannaford at ictoria, the
tall, muffled-up man that edbitter saw  Thats--certain"

"eems so," agreed Hetherwick.  He was still studying the telegram.
"ent off from leet treet twelve-fifteen that day," he muttered.
"es--there doesnt seem much doubt about this.  I wonder who this man
Ambrose is?"

"Well soon get to know something about that, r. Hetherwick"
eclaimed atherfield briskly.  "ow, Im just going to put that wire
in my pocket, lock up this flat again, have another word or two with
that caretaker chap, and go in search of the information you refer to.
ome with me  ater, I shall get a search warrant, and make a thorough
eamination of this flat.  ets be moving."

ownstairs again, atherfield called up the caretaker.

"ou say r. Ambrose has been away for a bit?" he asked.  "Is there
anything unusual in that?"

"Well, not so very," answered the man.  "ver since he came here, two
or three years ago, hes been used to going away for a while.  I
believe he used to go over to aris.  ut I never remember him being
away more than a week at a time before."

"vidently hes a doctor," suggested atherfield.  "id he ever have
patients come to see him here?"

The caretaker shook his head.

"o," he replied.  "He never had anybody much come to see him
here--never remember anybody, unless it was somebody he brought in at
night for a smoke, you know.  He generally went out early in a morning,
and came home late--very late."

"What about his meals?" asked atherfield.

"Hed no meals here--unless he made himself a cup of coffee or so in a
morning," said the caretaker.  "All his meals out--breakfast, too.
undays as well as weekdays.  We saw very little of him."

"Who does up his rooms--makes the bed and so on?" inuired atherfield.

"y wife," answered the caretaker.  "he does all that."

"And she hasnt had anything to do for--how long?"

"Well, itll be three weeks, Im sure.  He never used to say anything
at any time when he went off--just went.  Hed call downstairs when he
came back and let us know he was back, dye see?  ut we never thought
hed be as long away as this, this time.  It was only this morning,
just before you came, that my missus said to me that it seemed ueer."

"Why ueer?"

"ecause hes taken nothing with him.  However short a time he might be
away before, he always took a suit-case, clean linen, shaving things,
so on--he was a very particular gentleman about his appearance--always
dressed like a swell and had a clean shirt every day used to have a
nice heavy washing-bill, anyhow"

"id he seem to be pretty well supplied with money?" asked atherfield.
"Or--the opposite?"

"ouldnt rightly say," replied the caretaker.  "Always paid his rent,
and us, and the washing regular, but as for anything else, why, wed no
means of knowing.  Of course, as I tell you, he always looked the
gentleman."

"I see" said atherfield.  "All right--youll see me again this
afternoon."

He strode away towards the trand, and there ushered Hetherwick into
the first empty tai-cab they met.

"Where now?" asked Hetherwick as atherfield followed him into the cab
after a word to its driver.

"Were going now, sir, to Hallam treet, to the offices of the eneral
edical ouncil," answered atherfield promptly.  "Ive had eperience
of inuiring into the antecedents of medical men before, and I know
where to find out all about any of em.  Im going to find out all
about this r. harles Ambrose--that is, of course, if hes an nglish
doctor."

"robably he isnt," remarked Hetherwick, "any more than aseverie is."

"Ah, aseverie" eclaimed atherfield.  "Id forgotten that man for
the time being  Well, while were about it, well see if we can
unearth a bit of information concerning him.  Weve done a bit of good
work this morning, ye know, r. Hetherwick" he went on, rubbing his
hands with satisfaction.  "Weve practically made certain that Ambrose
was the man who met Hannaford at ictoria, and were sure hes the man
to whom acpherson supplied the bottle in which the poison was
discovered at ranetts room.  And now well hope for a bit more
illumination in the darkness"

Hetherwick presently found himself closeted with atherfield and a
grave official who, after seeing atherfields credentials and
listening to his reasons for his visit of inuiry, began to consult
various books of reference.  resently he left the room and was away
some time when he returned he brought with him two slips of paper,
which he handed to atherfield.

"I have had the particulars you reuire written out for you," he said,
"so you can eamine them at your leisure.  I--" here he smiled
frostily--"I gather that you are somewhat anious to get in touch with
these men?"

"I think its etremely probable, sir, that before the days over I
shall be eceedingly anious to get in touch with both" answered
atherfield, with something very like a wink.  "ore than anious"

The grave official nodded and smiled again, and atherfield and
Hetherwick went away.  Outside atherfield looked right and left.

"r. Hetherwick," he said, "its well past twelve, and Id my breakfast
before eight--Im hungry  ets turn into the first decent place we
see and get a bite and a sup  And well eamine these papers."

He presently led Hetherwick into the saloon bar of a tavern, and
remarking that he had a taste for ale and bread and cheese at that time
of day, provided himself with these matters and retreated to a snug
corner, whither Hetherwick followed him with a whisky and soda.

"Heres success to our endeavours, r. Hetherwick" said atherfield,
lifting his tankard.  "Im now firmly under the impression that were
adding link after link to the chain  ut lets see what weve got here
in this crabbed writing."

He laid the slips of paper on the table at which they sat both bent
over them.  There were not many words on either, but to Hetherwick they
were significant enough in their plain straightforwardness.


harles Ambrose, ..  Oon.  edical Officer of Health, rayport,
ancs, - in practice Whiteburn, ancs, - police
surgeon, ellithwaite, W.., orks, - in practice rondesbury,
ondon, -.  truck off egister by eneral edical ouncil for
unprofessional conduct, .


"o much for him" muttered atherfield, his cheek bulging with bread
and cheese.  "I thought it would turn out to be something of that sort
ow tother"


yprian aseverie, ...., ....  In practice irmingham,
- at Wyborough, orthants, - at alston, .,
-, onvicted of fraud at entral riminal ourt, , and
struck off egister by eneral edical ouncil, .


"Ho-ho" eclaimed atherfield.  "een in the dock already, has he?
Well, well, r. Hetherwick, we continue to learn, sir  We know still
more.  aseveries a convicted criminal.  oth have been struck off the
register.  Ambrose was certainly at ellithwaite--and hed be there,
according to these dates, at the time of the Whittingham affair.  A
promising pair--for our purpose  What do you think?"

"Im wondering if the two men know each other," answered Hetherwick.

"houldnt wonder," said atherfield.  "robably they do.  robably
theyre mied up together in this affair.  robably theyre actual
partners in it--accessories to each other.  ut now that I know this
much about them, I can find out more, especially about Ambrose, as he
was a police surgeon.  I can find out, too, what aseveries particular
crime was.  efrauding a patient, I should imagine.  ut Ill put one
or two men on to working up particulars and records of both aseverie
and Ambrose this afternoon, and, of course, I shall go back and
thoroughly eamine that flat in ohn treet."

"And, I suppose, in view of the evidence supplied by acpherson, set up
a search for Ambrose?" suggested Hetherwick.

"To be sure  Well get out a tracked by the police notice,
describing him to the best of our power," replied atherfield.  "ut
Ill tell you--in my opinion itll be a stiff job getting hold of him.
If you want my opinion, as a private individual, hes probably got that
secret invention of Hannafords and gone off across the Atlantic with
it--to turn it into money."

"Thats very likely," assented Hetherwick.  "ut what about aseverie?"

"Im not so much concerned about him now," said atherfield.  "Ambrose
seems to be the man I want--first, anyway.  ut I shall do what I can
to get hold of aseverie.  If these enteney and lenkinsop people had
only come to us instead of laying plans of their own, some good would
have been done.  I shouldnt have let the man got away"

"y belief," observed Hetherwick, "is that aseverie and Ambrose are
partners in this affair.  And--how do we know that they didnt meet at
over, and that they havent gone off together?"

till wondering about this, Hetherwick net morning went round to
incolns Inn ields and asked to see one of the partners.  He was
shown into the room in which he and atherfield had had their interview
on the previous day.  ut he found ajor enteney alone.  lenkinsop,
remarked the junior partner, had business in the ourts that morning.

"I called," eplained Hetherwick, "to ask if you had any more
information about aseveries disappearance at over."

enteney made a wry face.

"ore veed than ever about that" he answered.  "ost inecusably
stupid conduct on the part of our man--man weve always found so
reliable previously.  He came back yesterday afternoon, crestfallen,
told us all about it, and got a jolly good wigging.  Hed done well at
first.  Tracked his man from iversreade ourt to orking, and thence
to edhill, and thence to over, after one or two changes.  aseverie
put up at some hotel--I forget which--near the harbour our man,
certain that aseverie was uite unconscious that he was being
followed, put up there, too.  othing happened.  He saw aseverie at
dinner that night, saw him in the smoking-room after in fact, he had a
game of billiards with him, and saw him retire to bed their rooms were
adjacent.  He felt sure of seeing him at breakfast, but when he went
down he found that the bird had flown--flown, said the night porter,
before si oclock he didnt know where.  or could our man trace him
at station or pier, or anywhere."

"areless sort of watching," said Hetherwick.

"Worse than careless" agreed enteney.  "As I said, he caught it hot.
ut now----"

The telephone bell on lenkinsops desk rang.  With a word of ecuse
enteney turned to it.  A moment later a smothered ejaculation of
surprise came from him, followed by a sharp interrogation on his part.
uddenly he turned on Hetherwick.

"ood heavens" he eclaimed.  "Whats all this?  This is ady
iversreade speaking.  he says her sister, who came yesterday, and
iss eatherstone have been kidnapped  idnapped--this morning"

Hetherwick leapt to his feet with a sharp eclamation--half amaed,
half incredulous.  ut already his thoughts were with hona he saw the
dangers of the situation for her as enteney could not see them.

"Impossible" he said.  "idnapped in broad daylight?  And--from
there?"

ut enteney was still busy at the telephone, giving and receiving
rapid answers.

"es, yes" he was saying.  "To be sure--police--yes  Im coming
straight there now--car--tell the police to get busy."

He turned sharply to Hetherwick as he laid down the instrument.

"ear theres no impossibility about it" he said.  "ady iversreade
says they were carried off as they crossed from the ourt to the
Home--shes heard something of a big car with strange men in it.  Im
going down there at once--theres more in this affair than one sees at
first."

"Ill come with you," said Hetherwick.  "Where can we get a car--a fast
one?"

"arage close by, in ingsway," answered enteney, hurriedly seiing on
one of several greatcoats that hung in a recess.  "Here--get into one
of these--youre about my height, and the airs still nippy, motoring.
ow come on--well be there in under the hour.  ou know," he
continued, as they left the office and hastened towards ingsway, "I
think I see through something of this already, Hetherwick.  These
fellows probably believed they were kidnapping ady iversreade--and
got her sister in mistake for her.  ansom, you know  The blackmailing
dodge failed--now theyre trying this.  A desperate and dare-devil lot,
evidently"

Hetherwick nodded a silent assent.  He was wondering whether or not to
tell enteney that the iss eatherstone of whom he had just spoken was
in reality the granddaughter of the man whose mysterious murder
appeared to be the starting-point of the more recent, eually
mysterious events.  That fact, it seemed to him, would have to come out
sooner or later--and there might be possible complications, perhaps
unpleasantness, when ady iversreade discovered that hona had gone to
her as a spy.  ight it not be well to take enteney into his
confidence and eplain matters?  ut, on reflection, he decided to wait
until they knew the eact situation at iversreade ourt so far, in
spite of ady iversreades news he felt it difficult to believe that
two women, one of them, to his knowledge, a girl of character and
resource, and the other a woman of the world, used to travelling and to
adventure, could be carried off in broad daylight in immediate prospect
of two large houses--the thing seemed impossible.




HAT I

TH OO OA

ome fifty minutes later, the big, powerful car, which enteney had
commissioned in ingsway, dashed up to iversreade ourt.  Hetherwick
found that there had been no eaggeration in ady iversreades
telephone message.  he herself came hurrying out to meet them there
were men standing about the terrace outside and others visible in the
park a couple of uniformed policemen followed ady iversreade from
her study, where Hetherwick supposed her to have been in consultation
with them.  And her first glance was directed on Hetherwick himself
she addressed him before enteney could go through any hurried
introduction.

"Ive seen you before" she eclaimed abruptly.  "ou were with my
secretary, iss eatherstone, at ictoria, unday morning.  Are you
engaged to her?"

"o" replied Hetherwick.  "ut we are close friends."

"Well, iss eatherstones been run away with--and so has my sister,
adame istorelle," continued ady iversreade.  "Thats the long and
short of it  ou seemed almost incredulous when I rang you up," she
continued, turning to enteney, "but theres no doubt about it--theyve
been kidnapped, under my very windows.  And we havent a single clue, a
trace of any sort."

"o far, you mean," answered enteney coolly.  "ut come--but let me
hear all about it.  What are the details?"

"etails" eclaimed ady iversreade.  "We dont know any details
All I know is this--my sister came here from Hampshire yesterday
evening, to stay a few days.  This morning, after we had breakfasted,
she and iss eatherstone set out across the park for the Home, leaving
me here--I meant to follow in a few minutes.  I did follow--I wasnt
ten minutes behind them.  ut when I got to the Home, they werent
there, and itchell, the man at the door, said they hadnt come.  They
didnt come  ventually, I came back here, to find out if something
had happened and theyd returned by some other way.  ut they werent
here.  Then I began to make some inuiry.  One of the housemaids, whod
been looking out of a top window, said shed seen a car go at a great
rate down the middle drive in the direction of the high road soon after
adame istorelle and iss eatherstone left the house.  And of course
theres no doubt about it--theyve been carried off in that  This is
more work of that man aseveries"

"ou said something over the phone about strange men being seen in the
car," remarked enteney.

"Oh, that?--yes, the same girl said she thought she could see two men
sitting in the car," answered ady iversreade.  "Of course theyd be
strange."

enteney turned to the policemen, at the same time tapping Hetherwicks
arm.  "I think wed better go across the park and see for ourselves if
there are any signs of a struggle at any particular place," he said.
"I dont think either adame istorelle or iss eatherstone likely
persons to be carried off without making a fight for it.  Have you been
across the grounds yet?" he added, to the elder of the two men.  "I
mean by the path they took?"

"ot yet, sir weve only just arrived," answered the man.

"ome along, then," said enteney.  He lingered a moment as Hetherwick
and the policemen left the hall, and said a few words to ady
iversreade then he hurried out and headed his party.  "This way," he
continued, leading Hetherwick along the terrace, "I know the usual
route to the Home--plain sailing from here to there, ecept at one
spot, and there, I conclude, whatever has happened did happen"

Hetherwick paid particular attention to the route along which enteney
led his party.  The path went straight across the park, from the end of
the terrace at the ourt to near the front entrance of the Home, and
from the ourt itself it looked as if there was no break in it.  ut
about half-way between the two houses there was an important break
which could not be seen until pedestrians were close upon it.
Transecting the park from its southern to its northern boundaries was a
sunk roadway--the middle drive to which ady iversreade had
referred--gained from the park above, on each side, by ornamental
steps.  Whatever happened in that roadway, Hetherwick saw at once,
could not have been seen from the higher ground above, save by anyone
close to its edge.  ut two or three hundred yards or so from the
steps, which made a continuation of the path, the embankments of the
sunk road flattened out into the lower stretches of the park, and there
the road itself could be seen from the top windows of the ourt, and
from those of the Home also.

enteney paused at the top of the ornamental steps.

"If these two ladies have been carried off, as they certainly seem to
have been," he said, turning to his companions, "this is the spot
ow, just let me eplain the lie of the land.  The main road edges the
park at the northern end, as you all know.  ut there is a good road at
the southern etremity, and the sunk road runs down from it.  A car
could come down from there, be pulled up here, and kept waiting until
the two ladies came along.  They would have to descend these steps,
cross the road, and ascend the steps on the other bank to get to the
other half of the park.  ow suppose theyre forced into a car at the
foot of the steps--the car goes off for the main road and gets clear
away within a minute or two of the kidnapping taking place  Theres
the difficulty  The thing would be easy to do--granted force.
robably, the two captives were forced into the car at the point of
revolvers."

"Thats about it, sir" agreed the elder of the policemen.  "o choice
in the matter, poor things  And, as you say, theyd be in and
off--miles off--before they fairly knew what had happened."

"ome down and lets see the roadway," said enteney.

ut there was nothing to see at the foot of the steps.  The road, like
all roads and paths on the iversreade ourt property, was in a perfect
state of repair, and there was scarcely a grain of dust on its
spick-and-span, artificially treated and smoothed surface certainly
there were no signs of any struggle.

"Thats how its been, you may depend upon it," observed enteney to
Hetherwick as they looked about.  "The men were waiting here with
revolvers.  Theyd force them into the car and get in after them a
third man, an accomplice, would drive off.  If only we had some more
definite information about the car and its occupants"

"Theres an old chap coming down the road who seems to have his eye on
us," remarked Hetherwick, looking round.  "He may have something to
tell.  After all, some of the people hereabouts must have seen the car"

The old man, evidently a labourer, came nearer, looking inuiringly
from one to the other.  He had the air of one who can tell something on
occasion.

"e you gentlemen a-enuirin about a moty-car what was round here this
mornin?" he asked, as he came up.  "I hear there was somebody a-askin
uestions that way, so I just come down-along, like."

"We are," answered enteney.  "o you know anything?"

The old man pointed up the sunk road to a part of the park where it was
lost amongst trees and coppices.

"ives up there, I do," he said.  "y cottage, it be just behind they
trees, tother side o the road what this here runs into my garden, it
runs down to the edge o that road.  And when I was a-gardenin this
morning--mebbe bout half-past-nine oclock, that was--I sees a
moty-car what come along from your way, and turns into this here sunk
road.  ebbe thats what youre a-talkin bout?"

"o doubt," agreed enteney.  "And were much obliged to you.  ow what
sort of a car was it?  losed, or open?"

"Oh, twas closed up, same as one o they old cabs what us dont see no
more now," said the old man.  "ut I see inside it, for all that.  Two
gentlemen."

"Two gentlemen, eh?" repeated enteney.  "ust so.  And a driver
outside, of course."

"Oh, aye there was a driver outside, to be sure.  In livery, he
was--like a gentlemans servant.  mart feller"

"ould you describe the gentlemen?"

"o, surely--two gentlemen, though a-sitting back, I sees em  And
sees the moty-car, too, turn down this here very road."

"What sort of car was it?" inuired enteney.  "What colour was it
painted?"

"Well, now, you beats me  It med be a sort o greyish colour--or
again, it med be a sort o yaller, lightish yaller, or it med be
drabbish--I couldn acly go to for say what it was, proper.  ut a
lightish colour."

"ightish--grey, yellow, or drab--something of that sort?"

"urely  Her wasnt a dark un, anyhow.  ut the feller what drove,
now he were in a dark livery--I took particlar notice of he, cause he
was so smart as never was.  reen that was his colour, and gold lace.
ooked like a duke, he did  And I thought, hearin as there was them
in the park as was inuirin, like, as ow Id come and tell ee."

enteney rewarded the informant with some silver, and turned to his
companions with a shake of the head.

"A light-coloured car with two men in it, driven by a man who wore a
dark-green livery with gold lace on it" he remarked.  "Thats about
all were likely to get.  And--if this has been a carefully-planned
affair, the chauffeur would change his livery before theyd gone
far--slip another coat on  However----"

They went back to the ourt, consulting together obviously, there was
nothing to do but to send out inuiries in the surrounding country.
enteney was sceptical about the success of these.

"When one considers the thousands of cars to be seen in any given area
during one morning," he said, "how can one epect that anybody, even
rustics, should give special attention to any particular one?  Theres
no doubt about it--theyve got clean away"

It seemed as if nothing could be done but to give the kidnapping full
publicity through the police and the press.  In the neighbourhood of
the ourt nobody beyond the housemaid and the old cottager appeared to
have seen the car and its occupants.  ut during the afternoon, as
Hetherwick and enteney were about to set out for ondon, a man came to
the house and asked to see ady iversreade.  ady iversreade went out
to him the two men accompanied her, and found at the hall door an
elderly, respectable-looking fellow who had driven up in a light cart.
He had heard, he said, of what had happened at iversreade ourt that
morning, and he believed he could tell something, for he was sure that
he had seen a car, such as that the police were inuiring after, pass
his house.

"And where is that?" asked ady iversreade.

"About two miles the other side of orking, my lady, on the ondon
oad.  Im a market gardener--name of Thomas hillam.  And I was
outside my garden gate this morning, about, as near as I can reckon,
ten oclock, when I saw a car, light-coloured, coming from orking, at
a particularly high speed--a good deal faster than it had any right to
do  I watched it careful, my lady.  ut just as it got near to my
place, there was a man drove some sheep out of a by-lane, a few yards
past my garden and the car was obliged to slow down.  And so I saw the
folks in it."

"es?" said ady iversreade.  "And--who was in it?"

"There was a couple of men, my lady, on the front seat, and a couple of
ladies in the back.  Of course, it was a closed car, but I saw em,
plain enough, all four.  It seemed to me as if they were all either
uarrelling or having high words--they were all talking together,
anyway.  ut though the car had slowed down cause of the sheep, it was
still moving at a fair pace, and, of course, they were past and gone,
ondon way, in a minute, as it were.  All the same, I saw em clearly
enough to see that one of the men inside was a man Ive seen before."

"About here?" eclaimed ady iversreade.

"o, my lady," answered hillam.  "In ondon.  Its this way, my
lady--me and my missis, weve a grown-up daughter whats in service in
ondon--rosvenor ardens.  ow and again we go up to see her, and stop
a night or two close by.  And of course we take a look round.  ow Ive
seen that man two or three times about ictoria tation way--I knew him
at once when I saw him this morning, and----"

"ust tell us what hes like, will you?" interrupted enteney.  "As
near as you can."

"Well, sir, I aint good at that, but hes a tall, good-looking,
smart-dressed gentleman, with a beard and moustache--taller nor what
you and that other gentleman is, sir.  I seen him in ictoria
treet--mebbe it was his height made me notice him."

"And youre sure that was the man you saw in the car this morning?"

"ake no doubt on it, sir  Im as certain as that I see yourself.  Oh,
yes"

Hetherwick put in a uestion.

"The second man in the car?  id you notice him?  an you remember him?"

hillam reflected for awhile.

"I remember that he was a white-faced chap," he said at last.  "Wore a
top-hat, silk."

When hillam had gone away, Hetherwick turned to his companions.

"That sounds like Ambrose, for one man, and aseverie for the other,"
he said.  "What devilry are they up to now?  enteney--we must get back
to ondon"




HAT 

OI TA

It was an hour later when they pulled up at atherfields head-uarters
and went in to find him.  atherfield, brought to them after some
search, rubbed his hands at sight of them.

"ome at the right moment" he eclaimed, "Ive got news--of Ambrose"

atherfield evidently epected his visitors to show deep interest, if
not passive enthusiasm, in respect of this announcement, and he stared
wonderingly on seeing that their faces showed nothing but gloom and
concern.

"ut you--you look as if youd had bad news" he eclaimed.  "omething
gone wrong?"

"I forgot that we might have telephoned you from iversreade ourt,"
replied Hetherwick, suddenly realising that atherfield seemed to know
nothing of the days happening.  "ut I thought the orking police
would do that.  one wrong--yes, and it may have to do with
Ambrose--weve heard news that seems to fit in with him.  ut its
this," he went on to give atherfield a brief account of the days
events.  "There you are" he concluded.  "Ive no doubt whatever that
aseverie and Ambrose are in at this--kidnapping in broad daylight.
atherfield, youve got to find them"

atherfield had listened with close attention to Hetherwicks story,
and now he looked from him to enteney from enteney to a printed bill
which lay on his desk at his side.  "I think I see what all this is
about," he remarked, after a pause.  "Those chaps think theyve got--or
they thought they got--ady iversreade  To hold for ransom, of
course.  They took iss Hannaford because she chanced to be there.
What they really kidnapped--and theres more of that done than you
gentlemen might think, I can tell you--was ady iversreades sister.
ut now, however sisters--twin sisters--may closely resemble each
other, there comes a time when difference of identitys bound to come
out.  y this time--perhaps long before--those men must have discovered
that they laid hands on the wrong woman  And the uestion is--what
would they do then?"

"It seems to me that the more immediate uestion is--where are the two
women?" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "Think of their danger"

"Oh, well, r. Hetherwick, I dont suppose theyre in any personal
danger," answered atherfield.  "Theyre in the hands of brigands, no
doubt, but I dont think therell be any maltreatment of them--set your
mind at rest about that.  They dont do that sort of thing nowadays
its all done politely and with every consideration, I believe.  As to
where they are?  Why, somewhere in ondon  And there are over seven
millions of other people in ondon, and hundreds upon hundreds of
thousands of inhabited houses--a lot of needles in that bundle of hay,
gentlemen"

"Theyve got to be found" repeated Hetherwick doggedly.  "oull have
to set all your machinery to work  This cant----"

"Wait a bit, Hetherwick," interrupted enteney.  He turned to
atherfield.  "ou said you had news of this man Ambrose?  What news?"

atherfield tapped the printed bill which lay on his desk.

"I had that circulated broadcast this morning," he answered.  "And
then, of course, the newspapers have helped.  Well, not so very long
before you came in, I was called to the telephone by a man named
illiner, who told me he was the landlord of the reen Archer Tavern,
in Wood treet, Westminster----"

"Westminster again" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "That seems to be the
centre point"

"And a very good thing to have a centre-point, r. Hetherwick," said
atherfield.  "When things begin to narrow down, one gets some chance.
Well, I was saying--this man rang me up to say that if Id go down
there he thought he could give me some information relative to the bill
about the missing man.  What hed got to say, he said, was too long for
a telephone talk.  I answered that Id be with him shortly, and I was
just setting off when you arrived.  Of course, I dont know what he can
tell--it may be nothing, it may be something.  erhaps you gentlemen
would like to go with me and hear what it is?"

"I would, but I mustnt," replied enteney.  "I must go to my office
and hear if ady iversreade or the local police have had any fresh
news.  eep in touch with me, though, atherfield--let me know what you
hear."

"Ill go with you," said Hetherwick.  "Westminster" he muttered again,
when enteney had gone.  "It looks as if this man Ambrose was known in
that district."

"ikely" assented atherfield.  "ut you know, r. Hetherwick, there
are some ueer spots in that uarter  eople who know the purely
ornamental parts of Westminster, such as the Abbey, and the Houses of
arliament, and ictoria treet, and so on, dont know that there are
some fine old slums behind em  ut Ill show you when we get down
there.  We shall go through one or two savoury slices."

He was putting on his overcoat as he spoke, in readiness for setting
out, but before he had buttoned it a constable entered with a card.

"Wants to see you particularly, and at once," he said.  "Waiting
outside."

"ring him in--straight" answered atherfield.  He pushed the card
along his desk in Hetherwicks direction.  "ord orradale" he
eclaimed.  "Whos he?"

"The man whos engaged to adame istorelle," replied Hetherwick, in an
undertone.  "Hampshire magnate."

atherfield turned epectantly to the open door.  A shortish, stoutish
person, who looked more like a typical ity man, prosperous and
satisfied, came hustling in and gave Hetherwick and his companion a
sharp, inuiring glance which finally settled on atherfield.

"r. atherfield?" he asked.  "ust so  Im ord orradale--oh, of
course, I sent in my card--just so  Well, r. atherfield, Ive had an
etraordinary communication from ady iversreade.  he telephoned to
my house in Hill treet this morning, but I was down in the ity, and
didnt hear of her message till late this afternoon.  he says her
sister, adame istorelle, has been kidnapped
idnapped--preposterous"

"Im afraid its neither preposterous nor improbable, my lord,"
answered atherfield.  "Im uite sure adame istorelle has been
kidnapped, and ady iversreades secretary, iss eatherstone, with
her.  Ive been down at iversreade ourt most of the day, and theres
no doubt about it--the two ladies were carried off from there by three
men in a fast car, which was driven towards ondon.  Thats a fact"

"od bless my soul" eclaimed ord orradale.  "In broad daylight
Twentieth century, too  And is there no clue?"

"one so far, my lord.  Of course, weve noised the affair as much as
possible, and all our people are on the look out.  ut its a difficult
case," continued atherfield.  "The probability is that the ladies have
been rushed to some house in ondon and that theyre there in
captivity.  Of course, one theory is that the kidnappers took adame
istorelle for her sister.  They meant to get ady iversreade and hold
her to ransom."

ord orradale pursed his lips.  Then he rubbed his chin.  Then he
shook his head.  inally he gave Hetherwick a shrewd glance, eyeing him
from head to foot.

"m" he said.  "Ah  This gentleman?  ot one of your people, I think,
atherfield?"

"o, my lord.  This gentleman is r. Hetherwick, of the iddle Temple,
who is interested very deeply in certain matters connected with the
affair.  r. Hetherwick has been down to iversreade with me, and your
lordship can speak freely before him."

ord orradale gave Hetherwick a friendly, knowing nod.  Then he
glanced at the door, and atherfield made haste to close it.

"Thank ee," said ord orradale.  "ust as well to be in private.
m--I think Id better tell you something, atherfield.  I dare say
thats a reasonable supposition of yours--that these villains took
adame istorelle for her sister.  ut I dont think they did.  I think
they knew very well whom they were seiing.  ind you--theyd have
seied ady iversreade too if shed happened to be there.  ut it was
madame they were after"

"If your lordship would eplain----" suggested atherfield.

"Im going to--its what I come here for  I think I can just put you
on the right scent.  ou may have heard that adame istorelle and I
are about to marry?  ery well, I accordingly knew a good deal about
her affairs.  ow, I dont know whether you know or not that adame
istorelle is actively concerned--or has been--in buying and selling
jewels on commission?  Thats her speciality."

"Heard something of it, my lord," replied atherfield.

"ery well.  ow, uite recently adame istorelle bought up in aris a
magnificent set of stones which had been at one time the property of a
member of the ussian Imperial family.  he brought them here to
ondon, meaning, shortly, either to send or take them personally to
America to her customer.  This deal, unfortunately, got into the
papers.  ow, its my belief that these fellows have kidnapped madame
in order to get hold of these jewels.  o you see?"

"Ah" eclaimed atherfield.  "I see, my lord  That puts a new aspect
on the case.  ut--surely adame istorelle wouldnt have the stones on
her?"

ord orradale winked--deliberately--at both his hearers.

"o" he said.  "o--she wouldnt.  ut the scoundrels would figure on
this--that when she was fairly in their power they would be in a
position to make her give them up--to force her, in short, to disclose
their whereabouts.  If theyre desperate villains, not likely to stick
at anything, I think theyll have forced madame to compliance--and in
doing so give you a chance to lay hands on them"

"How, my lord?" asked atherfield eagerly.

ord orradale gave the two men a confidential glance.

"This way," he replied.  "The jewels were deposited, for safety, by
adame istorelle at the Imperial afe eposit.  he rents a safe
there.  ow, dont you see what Im suggesting?  These men may force
her to give them the necessary key and a signed order to the safe
people to let the bearer open madames safe and take away a certain
case in which the jewels are packed.  Thats what I think will be done.
And what you ought to do is to see the Imperial afe eposit officials
at once, warn them of what I suggest may happen, and take your own
means of watching for such a messenger arriving, and for tracking him
when he departs.  h?"

"Or arresting him there and then," said atherfield.

"o, I shouldnt" declared ord orradale.  "Im not a policeman, you
know, but I can give a hint to one.  Instead of arresting the man--who,
you must remember, will be sure to have madames written authority on
him--that is if things turn out as I suggest--I should carefully follow
him.  or--hell probably go back to where madame and the young lady,
iss Whats-her-name, are detained  h?"

atherfield shook his head.

"I should doubt that, my lord" he answered.  "If things work out as
you suggest,--and its a highly probable theory--thats about the last
thing he would do  Once the jewels were in his possession----"

"ou forget this," interrupted ord orradale.  "They may use a
catspaw  h?"

"Well, theres that in it, certainly," assented atherfield.  "However,
Ill see that the Imperial afe eposit people are warned and that this
entrance is carefully watched to-morrow morning.  ut--the thing may
have been done already  Theres been plenty of time since the ladies
were carried off."

"o" said ord orradale.  "othings happened so far.  I called in at
the Imperial afe eposit as I came here they had neither seen adame
istorelle nor had any communication from her to-day.  And now the
place is closed for the night."

"id you warn them, then?" inuired atherfield.

"I didnt.  I thought it best to see you first," replied ord
orradale.  "The warning and the rest of it will come best from you."

"ery good, my lord.  uch obliged to your lordship for looking in,"
said atherfield.  "Well keep you posted up in anything that
happens--at Hill treet.  ow," he continued, when ord orradale had
left the office, "well get along to Westminster, r. Hetherwick, to
the reen Archer and its landlord, illiner."

The "reen Archer" proved to be a respectable tavern which boasted a
saloon bar.  ehind the glass screens of this they found a middle-aged,
sharp-eyed man, who at the sight of his visitors immediately opened the
door of a parlour in the rear and ushered them into privacy.  He
pointed silently to a copy of the bill asking for news of Ambrose.

"Aye" said atherfield.  "ust so.  I had your message.  ou think you
know this man?"

"rom this description of him in that bill, yes," replied the landlord.
"I think hes a man--gentleman, by all appearances--who used to come
into my saloon bar pretty regularly during this last si months.  ince
the end of last summer, I should say, up to about three weeks or so
ago."

"ot since then, eh?" asked atherfield.  "Three weeks?"

"About that.  o--he hasnt been in for uite that.  ut up to then
hed been in, well, four or five days a week.  Handsome, fine man--in
fact, youve described him eactly there.  I never knew who he
was--used to pass the time o day with him, you know, but that was all.
He always came in about the same time--one to one-thirty.  Hed have
sometimes a glass of bitter ale and a sandwich or two sometimes a
whisky and soda and two or three biscuits.  tood and had his snack and
went away.  ever talked much.  I took him for some gentleman that had
business hereabouts, and just wanted a bite and a sup in the middle of
the day, and turned in here for it.  ut I dont know what business he
could be concerned in round here.  He hadnt the tradesmans look on
him, you understand.  I should have said he was a professional man of
some sort.  Always very well dressed, you know--smart.  However, I did
notice one peculiar thing about him."

"What now?" asked atherfield.  "It all helps"

"Well," said the landlord, "I noticed that his hands and fingers were
stained--all sorts of colours.  ometimes it was more noticeable than
at others.  ut there it was."

"m" remarked atherfield.  He echanged a knowing glance with
Hetherwick.  And when, a few minutes later, they left the tavern, he
turned to him with an air of assurance.  "Im beginning to feel the
end" he said.  "eel it, if I dont see it.  tained fingers, eh?
Weve heard of them before, r. Hetherwick.  And Ill tell ye what it
is.  omewhere about this very spot theres some place where men are
dabbling--secretly, I should think--with chemicals, and Ambrose is one
of em, and perhaps aseverie another, and it was there that Hannaford
and that man rannet had been that night, and where they were
poisoned--and there, too, no doubt, these two ladies are at this
minute  Well--come to my place first thing in the morning."

Hetherwick, at a loss what to do further that night, went away and
dined, and, that done, strolled home to his chambers.  There was a
light in his parlour, and when he opened the door he found apperley,
evidently awaiting him, and with apperley a curly-headed, big-nosed,
beady-eyed young ew.




HAT I

TH O I WITI

Hetherwick realised at once that apperley had news, and was waiting
there to communicate it.  ut he looked not so much at apperley as at
apperleys companion.  apperley, as Hetherwick had remarked to more
than one person in the course of those proceedings, concealed his
sharpness under an unusually commonplace eterior he looked, as a
rule, like a young man whose ideas rarely soared above a low level.
ut the ew was of a different aspect--Hetherwick was not uite sure
whether he was rat or ferret.  There was subtlety and craft written all
over him, from his bright beady eyes to his long, thin, dirty fingers,
and before apperley spoke his employer felt sure that in this son of
Israel the clerk had found a valuable associate.

"Hullo, apperley" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "Waiting for me?  ouve
some news, I suppose?"

apperley, grave and formal, pointed a finger at the ew.

"r. Isidore oldmark, sir," he said.  "riend of mine.  I got him to
give me a bit of assistance in this aseverie and ivian affair.  The
fact is, sir, he knows ivians--dont you, Issy?"

"Thome" replied r. oldmark, with a grin.

"And he knows aseverie, too," continued apperley.  "y sight, anyhow.
o I got him--for a consideration--to watch for aseveries net
appearance on that scene, and then, when he did come, to keep an eye on
him--trick him, in fact.  And Issys seen him to-night, r. Hetherwick,
and followed him.  Then Issy came to me, and I brought him here."

"ood" said Hetherwick.  "it down, both of you, and Ill hear about
it."  He dropped into his own easy chair and again regarding the ew
decided that he was probably a creditable witness.  "What do you do at
ivians?" he asked.  "mployed there?"

r. oldmark glanced at apperley and smiled knowingly.  apperley
nodded.

"All confidential, Issy," he said reassuringly.  "oing no further."

"Of course this is all confidential--and secret," remarked Hetherwick.
"I only want to know the precise connection between ivians and r.
oldmark."

"Itth a thort of themi-official, mithter," answered the ew.  "The
fact ith, I do a bit o commithon work for ivianth cuthtomerth, turf
you know.  Tho--Im in and out of an evening.  Thee?"

"I see," said Hetherwick.  "All right  And you know aseverie?"

"Ath well ath I know my own nothe," replied r. oldmark.

"How long have you known him?"

"Thome time."

"o you know what he is?"

"Aint an idea, mithter--and noboody elthe that I knowth of  ivth on
hith witth, I should thay, if you athk me.  Wrong un"

"or where he lives?"

"o, mithter  All I knowth ith that he cometh to ivianth--now and
then."

"And you saw him to-night?"

"I did, mithter--to-night ath ever wath"

"What time was that?"

"About eight oclock, mithter--near ath I can fi it."

"Well, what happened?"

"Thith, mithter.  He came in about eight, ath I thay.  I wath there,
doing a bit o bithneth with another cuthmur.  atheverie, he didnt
thtop.  He wathnt in the plathe three minuteth, and while he wath in
he theemed--to me--to be a bit fidgety--thuthpithious, like.  ooked
round and about--cautiouth.  Then he went--and I followed him.
According to inthructionth from apperley there."

"Where did he go?"

"Well, mithter, Ill give you the particularth--in full when I theth
out on a job o that thort I do it proper.  He turned out o
andlethtick athage into the ane, and he had a drink at a bar there.
Then he went to Trafalgar uare Tube.  I wath clothe behind him when
he booked----"

"A moment.  oes he know you?"

"ay jutht know me by thite, mithter, but not enough to ethite any
thuthpithion in hith mind if he thaw me there behind him.  I never had
no truck with him--never thpoke to him."

"Well, go on.  Where did he book to?"

"Warwick Avenue, mithter.  Tho did I--of courth.  When we got there, I
followed him out--at a thafe dithtance.  He turned down to the anal,
crothed the bridge, and went down to Thant aryth anthionth.  And
there he went in."

Hetherwick glanced at apperley.  apperley permitted himself to wink
at his employer--respectfully, but knowingly.

"Went into t. arys ansions, eh?" said Hetherwick.  "Walked straight
in?"

"traight in, mithter--front entranth.  I thee him, from acroth the
road, talking to the man in livery--porter or whatever he hith.  I
could thee through the glath doorth.  Then I thee both of em go up in
the lift.  Tho I waited about a bit, jutht to thee if hed come out.
He did."

"oon?" asked Hetherwick.

"He wath inthide about ten minuteth.  Then he came out.  Alone.  Thith
time he went in tother direction.  I followed him acroth addington
reen to dgware oad Tube, and there--well, to tell you the truth,
mithter, there I lotht him  There wath a lot o people about, and I
made thure hed be going thouth.  ut he mutht ha gone wetht.  Anyway,
I lotht him altogether."

"Well--I think you saw enough to be of help," said Hetherwick.
"ow--just keep this to yourself, oldmark."  He motioned apperley
into another room, gave him money for his assistant, and waited until
the ew had gone, shown out by the clerk.  "leven oclock" he
remarked, glancing at his watch as apperley came back.  "apperley
were going out--to t. arys ansions.  And after weve been there,
and made a call, youd better come back here with me and take a
shake-down for the night--I shall want you in the morning, unless Im
mistaken."

It was one of apperleys chief virtues that he was always ready to go
anywhere and do anything, and he at once accompanied Hetherwick to the
top of iddle Temple ane, found a tai-cab within five minutes, and
proposed himself to sit up and shakedown that night and the net, if
necessary.

"cents getting hot, I think, sir," he remarked as they drove off,
after bidding the driver carry them to addington reen.  "Things seem
to be coming to a head."

"es--but I dont think you know everything," answered Hetherwick.  He
proceeded to give the clerk an epitomised account of the days doings
as they had related to himself, concluding with atherfields theory as
epressed after leaving the reen Archer.  "oure a smart chap,
apperley," he added.  "What do you think?"

"I see atherfields point," answered apperley.  "I can follow his
line.  He thinks like this Hannaford, when he came to ondon, wanted
to get rid, advantageously, of that formula of his about a new ink.  He
got into touch with Ambrose, whom, of course, hed known before at
ellithwaite.  Ambrose introduced him to some men who deal or dabble in
chemicals, of whom one, no doubt, is aseverie, and who seem to have a
laboratory or something of that sort somewhere in the Westminster
district.  On the night of the murder Ambrose met Hannaford, by
appointment, at ictoria, and took him there.  robably, Hannaford left
the sealed packet--opened by that time--with these fellows.  robably,
too, while there he told them--jokingly, very likely--what hed
discovered, from the picture in the papers, about the identity of rs.
Whittingham and adame istorelle.  And now comes in--ranett"

Hetherwick gave an eclamation that denoted two or three
things--surprise, for one.

"Ah" he said.  "ranett  To be sure  Id forgotten ranett"

"I hadnt," remarked apperley with a cynical laugh.  "ranett--and his
murder--is an essential factor.  What I think is this We know that
Hannaford met Ambrose at ictoria tation that all-important evening.
Ambrose, without doubt, took him to the place I hinted at just now--the
eact location of which is a mystery.  I think Hannaford stopped there
until late in the evening.  ut--I also think he went back again
With--ranett"

"Ah" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "I see"

"We know," continued apperley, "that ranett went that evening to see
the chemist who gave information about him we know, too, that he and
the chemist went and had a drink together, and parted at about closing
time, ranett then, according to the chemist, going towards ictoria
treet.  ow I think that ranett then met Hannaford--accidentally.
Theyd known each other in ellithwaite.  They talked--ranett told
Hannaford he was down on his luck.  Hannaford, evidently, was a
kind-hearted man, and I think he did two things out of kindness for
ranett.  He gave him that five-pound note----"

"That was got at ivians" interrupted Hetherwick uickly.

"To be sure" assented apperley.  "ut we know that Hannaford had been
at ivians--with aseverie--undoubtedly.  Taken there by aseverie,
which makes me certain that for two or three days before his death hed
been in touch with both aseverie and Ambrose.  Hannaford got that
fiver in change at ivians.  And he gave it to ranett, on hearing his
story.  ut he did something else--something that was far more
important--that is far more important--to us"

"What?" asked Hetherwick.

"He turned back to the place hed just left, and took ranett with
him" answered apperley with confidence.  "He knew ranett was a
trained and ualified chemist he thought he could get him a job with
these men who, presumably, were going to take up his own invention.  It
would be little more than half-past ten then.  Where else than at this
place are Hannaford and ranett likely to have been between that time
and the time at which they got into your carriage at t. amess ark?
Of course they were there--with Ambrose and aseverie."

"As you put it--highly probable," said Hetherwick.  "Two and a half
hours--doing what?"

"Ah, now we come to the real thing" eclaimed apperley.  "y own
belief is that Hannaford was fatally poisoned when he left those two
men the first time  Theyd two objects in poisoning him--or, to put it
another way, hed entrusted them with two secrets--one about adame
istorelle the other about his invention.  They wanted to keep both to
themselves and to profit by both.  The invention, no doubt, has
considerable value--Hannaford believed it had, anyway.  They thought
they could blackmail adame and her sister, ady iversreade.  o,
before Hannaford left them the first time, they poisoned him--cleverly,
subtly, devilishly--knowing that so many hours would elapse before the
poison worked, and that by that time hed be safe in bed at his hotel
and would die in his sleep.  ut--he went back to them again, and took
another man with him  o--that man had to die, too"

Hetherwick thought awhile in silence.

"All very good theory, apperley," he said at last.  "ut--it may be
nothing but theory.  Why did ranett run off at haring ross?"

"ecause ranett knew that Ambrose lived in ohn treet, close by,"
replied apperley with promptitude.  "He may have known it before he
may not have known it until that evening.  ut--he knew it  ost
likely he thought that Ambrose had returned home from the place in
Westminster Ambrose may have left there before Hannaford and ranett
did.  Anyway, we may be reasonably certain that when ranett left you
with the dying or dead man, he ran off to Ambroses flat--a few minutes
away."

"Why didnt he come back?" demanded Hetherwick.  "Im only wanting to
get at probabilities."

"Ive thought of that, too," replied apperley.  "I think he found
Ambrose out.  ut by that time hed had time to reflect.  He knew
something was wrong.  He knew that if he went back, hed find the
police there, and would be uestioned.  He might be suspected.  And
so--he went home, with the bottle in which Ambrose had given him a drop
of whisky for himself.  And--died in his sleep, as they thought
Hannaford would."

"Why should Ambrose have that bottle down at Westminster?" asked
Hetherwick.

"Why shouldnt he?" retorted apperley.  "A man whos taking a tonic
takes it at least three times a day--regularly.  Hed have his bottle
with him.  robably there are several similar empty bottles there at
that place."

"Where is that place?" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "Where?"

"ot to be found," said apperley, as the cab came to a stand.
"ut--heres this"

Hetherwick led his companion across addington reen and to the house
from which he and atherfield had watched the flats opposite.  ate as
it was, the lodging-house keeper was up, and lent a willing ear to
Hetherwicks reuest that he should go with him to his friend the
caretaker of the ansions.  That functionary was at supper.  He
continued to sup as Hetherwick, morally supported by the lodging-house
man, eplained matters to him, but at last he allowed his cheek to
bulge with unswallowed food and turned a surprised and knowing eye on
his principal visitor.

"lamed if I didnt wonder whether it was all O.. with that chap" he
eclaimed, banging the table with the haft of his knife.  "or all he
was uite the gentleman, I somehow suspicioned him  And yet, hed a
straight tale to tell come here on adames behalf, to get something
for her out of her rooms, had her keys, and give me a note from her
saying as how I was to allow the bearer to go up to her flat  What
more could I epect--and what could I do--under the circs?  I asks yer"

"Oh, he had a note, had he?" inuired Hetherwick.  "In adames
writing?"

The caretaker laid down his knife, and thrusting his hand in his
breast-pocket, drew forth an envelope and silently handed it over.  It
was an aure-tinted envelope, of a very good uality of paper, such as
is only sold in high-class stationery shops, and the sheet inside
matched it in tint and uality.  ut Hetherwick at once noticed
something about that sheet so, too, did apperley, peering at it from
behind his elbow.  About an inch and a half had been rather roughly cut
off at the top obviously some address had been engraved, or embossed,
or printed on the missing portion.  As for what was written on the
sheet, it was little--a simple order that the caretaker should allow
bearer to go into adame istorelles flat.

"ou recognised that as adames handwriting?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Oh, thats her fist, right enough, that is" replied the caretaker.
"I knew it at once.  And no wonder  I aint no scholard, not me--but
I knows enough to know that it ud pule one o them here forgers as
ye reads about to imitate that there sort o writing--more like as if
it had been done with a wooden skewer than a hristian pen  Oh, thats
hers."

Hetherwick handed the letter and envelope to apperley, who was holding
out a hand.

"Well," he said.  "I wish yed just let me have a look into adames
flat.  Theres something seriously wrong, and----"

"Oh, you can do that--long as Im with you," said the caretaker
readily.  He rose and led the way to the left, and presently ushered
them into a smart flat and turned on the electric light.  "ont see
nothing wrong here," he observed.  "The chap wasnt here ten minutes,
and he carried nothing heavy away, whatever he had in his pockets."

Hetherwick and apperley looked round.  verything seemed correct and
in order--the surroundings were those of a refined and artistic woman,
obviously one who loved order and system.  ut on a desk that stood in
the centre of the sitting-room a drawer had been pulled open, and in
front of it lay scattered a few sheets of adame istorelles private
notepaper, with her engraved address and crest.  ear by lay some
envelopes, similarly marked.  And with a sudden idea in his mind,
Hetherwick picked up a sheet or two of the paper and a couple of
envelopes and put them in his pocket.

A few minutes later, once more in the cab which they had kept waiting,
and on the way to Hill treet, whither Hetherwick had bidden the driver
go net, apperley turned to his employer with a sly laugh, and held up
something in the light of a street lamp by which they were passing.

"Whats that?" asked Hetherwick.

"The order written by adame istorelle," answered apperley,
chuckling.  "The caretaker didnt notice that I carried it off,
envelope and all, under his very eyes  ut I did--and here it is"

"What do you want to do with it?" demanded Hetherwick.  "Whats your
notion?"

ut apperley only chuckled again and without giving any answer
restored the aure-tinted envelope and its contents to his pocket.




HAT II

TH HIH-TA OIITO

ord orradale, who kept up honest, country-suire habits even in
ondon, had gone to bed when Hetherwick and apperley arrived at his
house, but he lost little time in making an appearance, in pyjamas and
dressing-gown, and listened eagerly to Hetherwicks account of the
recent transactions.

"orce" he muttered, nodding his head at each point of the story.
"orce got it out of her by force.  That is, if the orders genuine."

apperley produced the sheet of paper, which he had filched under the
caretakers eyes, and silently handed it over.

"Oh, thats adame istorelles handwriting" eclaimed ord orradale.
"Hers, without doubt.  ifficult to imitate, of course.  Oh, yes--hers
Well, that proves what Ive just said, r. Hetherwick--force  hes in
their power--with the young lady, iss--iss--eatherstone, to be
sure--and theyve made her write that.  et, theyll make her write an
order on the Imperial afe eposit.  We must be beforehand with them
there.  arly--early as possible in the morning.  eet me at
atherfields--I think hes pretty keen.  less me what a pack of
villains  ow I wonder where, in all ondon, these unfortunate ladies
are?"

"Thats precisely what all this ought to help us to find out," remarked
Hetherwick.  "Im not so much concerned about the valuables these men
are after as about the safety of----"

ord orradale gave him a uick, understanding glance.

"Of iss eatherstone, eh?" he said.  "I see--I see  And Im
concerned, too, about adame istorelle.  Well, this, as you say, ought
to help.  ut look here--we must be cautious--very cautious  We
mustnt let atherfield--you know what the police are--we mustnt let
him be too precipitate.  robably--if a man comes to the safe place,
hell go away from it to where these scoundrels are.  We must
follow--follow"

"I agree," said Hetherwick.

"ine oclock, then, at atherfields," concluded his lordship.  "And
may we have a strong scent, a rousing one, and a successful kill"

With this bit of sporting phraseology in their ears, Hetherwick and
apperley returned to the iddle Temple and retired for the rest of the
night, one to bed, the other to a shake-down on the sitting-room sofa.
ut when Hetherwicks alarum clock awoke him at seven-thirty and he put
his head into the net room to rouse the clerk, he found that apperley
had vanished.  The cushions, rugs, and blankets with which he had made
himself comfortable for the night were all neatly folded and
arranged--on the topmost was pinned a sheet of brief-paper, with a
message scrawled in blue pencil.


ou wont want me this morning off on an important notion of my own.
ook out for message from me about noon.

.


uttering to himself that he hadnt the least idea as to what his clerk
was about, Hetherwick made a hurried toilet, and an eually hurried
breakfast, and hastened away to meet atherfield and ord orradale.
He found these two together, and with them a uiet, solemn-faced
individual, clad in unusually sombre garments, whom atherfield
introduced as etective-ergeant uigman.  atherfield went straight to
business.

"His lordships just told me of your adventure last night, r.
Hetherwick," he said, "and Im beginning to get a sort of forecast of
whats likely to happen.  It was, of course, aseverie who went to
madames flat last night--thats settled.  ut what do you suppose he
went for?"

"ant say that Ive worked that out," answered Hetherwick, with a
glance at the others.  "ut I imagine that he went there to get, say,
certain keys--having forced adame istorelle to tell him where they
were.  The keys of her safe at the eposit place, I should think."

"o" replied atherfield, shaking his head knowingly, and with a sly
smile at uigman.  "o, not that.  Ill tell you what he went for--a
very simple thing.  He went to get some of adames private notepaper
He knew well enough that if he was to take an order on that afe
eposit to allow the bearer access to adames safe it would have to be
what the rench, I believe, call en rgle--eh?  Written on her own
notepaper in her own handwriting, and so on.  ee?"

"I think youre right, and I think he got it," said Hetherwick.  "A
drawer in her desk containing boes of stationery had been pulled out,
and some of its contents lay about the desk.  As a matter of fact,
though I scarcely know why I did it, I put some paper and some
envelopes in my pocket--here they are  I had a faint idea that they
might be useful--somehow."

"Well, thats the notion, depend on it," asserted atherfield, glancing
at the paper which Hetherwick produced.  "Ive no doubt that somebody,
representing adame istorelle, and bearing an authoriation from her,
written on her notepaper in her own writing, will present himself at
the Imperial afe eposit this morning.  ut--it wont be aseverie
And it wont be Ambrose"

"A stranger, eh?" suggested Hetherwick.

"We shall see.  ow," continued atherfield, glancing at the clock,
"well be off to the scene of operations.  This Imperial afe eposit
is in ingsway--Holborn end--and very fortunately situated for our job,
being close to the Tube station therell be lots of people about
there, and we shant attract attention.  And this is the way of it--his
lordship and myself will go into the afe eposit, see the people in
charge, eplain matters, and get them to tell us at once if and when
the epected ambassador arrives.  We shall let him----"

"Or her," interrupted uigman solemnly.

"ust so, my lad--it might be a she," assented atherfield.  "uite
likely  We shall let him or her get what is wanted from the safe and
go away, closely followed by all four of us.  While ord orradale and
I are inside, you and uigman, r. Hetherwick, will be outside,
talking, casually.  When we come out--and youll both keep a sharp
watch on the entrance hall--Ill give you the office as to the
particular person were following, and wherever that person goes, you
two will go.  ut dont come near us--well keep one side of the
street, you the other.  If the person takes to a cab or a bus--well,
well have to do the same.  ut Ive reasons for thinking he or she
will stick to his feet"

"How do we go?--all together?" asked Hetherwick.  "ecause--its a mere
idea--how do you know, atherfield, that these people--there would
appear to be more than one concerned--arent keeping an eye on you?"

"Ive thought of that," answered atherfield.  "o--were all going
separately.  Its now nine-fifteen.  That Imperial afe eposit doesnt
open its doors till ten--nobody can get in there until that time,
anyway.  We all four go out of this office on our own hook.  ach takes
his own method of getting to the top of ingsway.  As soon as I get
there, I go straight in and ask for the manager.  As soon as ord
orradale gets there, he follows suit--he and I forgather in the
managers room.  As for you two, go how you like--fly, if it suits
you--or wander round the side streets.  ut--you meet right opposite
the afe eposit entrance at precisely ten oclock, and under pretence
of casual meeting and conversation keep your eyes on it, noticing
everybody who goes in and comes out.  That clear?  Then we all clear
out--one by one."

Outside, and left to his own devices, Hetherwick walked a little way
and then hailed a tai-cab.  He gave his driver a confidential smile.

"ou can just help me to employ forty minutes," he said, as he got in.
"rive round--anywhere you like--up and down--as long as you put me
down at the corner of the Holborn estaurant at precisely two minutes
to ten.  ot that?"

The driver comprehended, and began a leisurely journey round certain
principal streets and thoroughfares.  Two minutes before ten he pulled
up at the Holborn-ingsway corner and gave his fare a grin.

"one it to the second, sir," he announced, nodding at an adjacent
clock.

"ood man" said Hetherwick, handing out something over the registered
fare.  Then an idea struck him.  "ook here" he continued
confidentially.  "I--and another man--may have to follow somebody from
here, presently.  ust drive down the street here, keep your flag down,
and wait--if I want you, I shall be close at hand."

The driver showed his understanding by a nod and a wink and moved a
little distance off to the kerbstone.  Hetherwick walked slowly down
the west side of ingsway.  And precisely as the clock struck ten he
saw ord orradale come from one direction and enter the
formidable-looking and just opened door of the afe eposit, and
atherfield appear from the other looking round again he was aware of
the solemn-faced uigman who sauntered round the corner of arker
treet and came towards him.  Hetherwick went on to meet him.

"There you are" he said, doing a little acting in case any inimical
eyes were on him.  "To the minute  Wed better appear to be doing a
bit of talk, eh?  The others have just gone in."

"I saw em, sir," replied uigman, coming to a halt on the kerb, and
affecting an interest in anything rather than on what he was really
working.  "Ah  ut the uestion is--when will they come out?  ight be
in a few minutes--so to speak.  ightnt be for hours--as it were"

"ou seem to be a melancholy chap," observed Hetherwick.

"elancholy job" muttered uigman.  "Watching isnt my line.  ut
atherfield--he particularly wanted me to be in at this."

"Why?" asked Hetherwick.

"eculiar knowledge of solicitors and their clerks in this part o
ondon," replied uigman.  "y line.  atherfield, hes an idea that
the order to open this safell be presented by a solicitor."

"ood ord--has he?" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "I wonder  ut--"

"ig help to these chaps, dont you see, if they can make a solicitor
do the cats-paw work," suggested uigman.  "Whod suspect a solicitor
of the High ourt?  And as I know pretty nearly all of em--theres one
I know now coming up tother side of the street," he continued
suddenly.  "That tallish, thin, pale-faced chap--see him?  ook at him
without seeming to look.  ow I wonder if hes the party we want?"

Hetherwick looked in the direction indicated.  He saw a youngish,
spectacled man in a silk hat, morning coat, and the corresponding
additions of professional attire, who was walking rapidly along from
outh to north.  He was a very mild, gentle-looking person, not at all
the sort to be concerned in dark plots and mysterious aims, and
Hetherwick said so.

"Aye, well, you never know" remarked uigman lugubriously.  "ut, as I
say, I know him.  r. arrowell--r. Octavius arrowell--solicitor, of
t. artins ane, that is.  een in practice for himself about four
years or so.  ice young feller--uiet.  And he is going in
there--see?"

Hetherwick saw.  There were several people, men and women, entering the
afe eposit just then, but r. arrowells silk hat and sloping
shoulders made him easily identifiable.

"I dessay its him" observed uigman, with a sigh.  "ust the sort to
be took in, he is  Innocent, unsuspecting sort o gentleman.
However--it maynt be.  eal o people use these afe eposits
nowadays."

r. arrowell disappeared.  The two watchers waited.  ive, ten,
fifteen, twenty minutes went by then r. arrowell came out.  He came
out just as any man would come out after transacting his business,
uietly.  obody followed him nobody seemed to be watching him--from
the afe eposit.  ut Hetherwick noticed at once that whereas he had
entered carrying nothing but an umbrella, he now carried a small,
suare, leather-covered bo.  With this in his left hand he crossed the
roadway, and advanced straight towards Hetherwick and uigman.

"o need to move, sir," whispered the detective.  "Take no notice--spot
him, though."

r. arrowell, seen at close uarters, looked to be a somewhat
absent-minded gentleman.  ut, chancing to look up as he stepped on the
pavement, his eyes encountered uigman, who touched his hat.

"orning, r. arrowell," said the detective.  "ice morning, sir."

"orning, uigman," responded r. arrowell.  "A very nice morning"

He nodded smilingly and went on his way, and round the corner into
arker treet.  uigman glanced at Hetherwick and shook his head.

"ot him" he said.  "atherfields not following.  And, as I said, we
may have to wait--hours"

ut at the end of another ten minutes atherfield and ord orradale
came together out of the entrance hall opposite.  An official, smiling
and talking, accompanied them to the threshold when they left him they
came straight across the road.  And it was obvious to Hetherwick that
each was in a state of surprise--possibly, of perpleity.  atherfield
hailed them as soon as he was within speaking distance.

"Heres a ueer business" he said.  "id you see a
professional-looking chap come away just now who carried a small
leather bo?"

"We saw r. arrowell, solicitor, t. artins ane," answered uigman.
"I know him.  one down arker treet."

"It was arrowell," assented atherfield.  "I know him, too.  Well," he
turned to Hetherwick, "its a ueer business.  They knew arrowell
across there--hes been to adame istorelles safe for her before.  He
came there just now, with the usual authorisation, on her notepaper,
went to the safe, got that small bo, and went.  arrowell--a
highly--respectable legal practitioner"

"Why didnt you stop him and ask him uestions?" inuired Hetherwick.

atherfield echanged a glance with ord orradale.

"ot there" he said.  "It--well, it looks as if adame really had sent
him  Her business."

"Of course shed sent him" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "ent him under
compulsion  The whole things a clever plant  These fellows probably
know that shes employed arrowell now and then, and they forced her to
write a letter to him, authorising him to come here again, and
enclosing an order on the afe eposit people  ont you see?"

"y ad, theres something in that, atherfield" said ord orradale.
"idnt strike me, though  on my honour, I really thought he had
come direct from her.  ouldnt think why, eactly, but then, as
atherfield says, a highly-respectable solicitor--eh?"

"Well soon settle it" eclaimed atherfield suddenly.  "Well go to
arrowells office.  etter discuss it there than have tackled him
here.  Anyway, hell have the suare bo.  uigman, call a tai"

"Theres a man here waiting for me," said Hetherwick.  He signalled to
his former driver who uickly came alongside.  "or anything we know,"
he continued, as all four took their seats, and were driven off,
"arrowell may have gone straight away somewhere to hand that bo over
We ought to have followed."

"I dont think so," replied atherfield.  "The whole things ueer, and
not at all what I epected.  ord orradale says that he never heard of
madame employing arrowell, and yet the afe people say hes been here
two or three times on her business.  ut well soon have it out of him."




HAT III

TH AA O ITT ITH TT

arrowells office proved to be up two flights of stairs in t.
artins ane.  They were dark and dingy stairs, and none of the four
men clambering up them noticed that an office-boy, rushing
unceremoniously downward carried a small parcel with which he fled out
of the door and away down the street.  They were, indeed, thinking of
arrowell--and within five minutes they were all in his private room.
or another five minutes atherfield was eplaining matters--eplaining
to an obviously startled and much astonished listener.

"Thats how it stands," concluded atherfield.  "ouve evidently got
the eplanation, r. arrowell.  ow----"

"ut you surprise me" broke in the solicitor.  "Ive acted for adame
istorelle in two or three matters--Ive got things from her safe for
her before, once or twice.  And I saw nothing unusual in the letter she
sent me this morning.  Here it is  ou can see it.  Her usual
notepaper--certainly her handwriting--nobody, I think, could imitate
that successfully.  ou see what she says--I was to give the enclosed
authorisation to the afe people, take out a small, suare,
brown-leather-covered bo from the safe, pack it up, and send it off to
r. . asing, ost Office, outhampton, at once, by epress delivery.
othing unusual in all that, I think.  Of course, I carried out her
wishes.  ut look at the letter."

All four men were looking at the letter.  It was as arrowell
described, and whether it had been written under duress or not, the
writing was bold and firm.  ut atherfield seied on the envelope, and
after a glance at it, pointed to the postmark.

"ee that" he eclaimed.  "osted in the .W. district late last
night.  If madame had been at home in addington the postmark would
have been different.  Well--but the suare bo, r. arrowell  ouve
got it, of course?  o you know that that bo probably contains jewels
worth----"

"The bo?" ejaculated arrowell.  "ot it?  Of course not  Its gone
The boy went off to the post office with it--oh, just before you came."

"ad" muttered ord orradale.  "Well--the post office, at once,
atherfield"

ut atherfield suddenly laughed, throwing up both hands as if with a
sudden inspiration.

"o, my lord, no" he said.  "o  The bo is safe enough in the post.
Its off to r. . asing, ost Office, outhampton.  And when r.
asing calls to collect it--hell find me"

There was triumphant conviction in atherfields tone there was the
impulse to immediate action in the way in which he pulled out a railway
guide from his pocket, and rapidly turned its pages.  ut Hetherwick
and ord orradale looked at each other.  And each saw that the other
was dubious.

"es," said ord orradale slowly.  "m--no doubt, atherfield.  ut I
say, you know--those jewels are worth no end  afe enough, perhaps, in
the hands of the postal authorities, now they are there, but--theres
many a slip, you know, and----"

"ou might take the postal authorities into your confidence," suggested
Hetherwick.  "These people are up to all sorts of wily tricks----"

atherfield laughed uietly.  It was the laugh of a man who knows his
own business thoroughly, and is a little impatient of outside criticism.

"I know what Im doing, gentlemen," he answered.  "eave it to me as to
what I do with the post office people.  Ive as good as got the
handcuffs on aseverie or on Ambrose--perhaps on both  This is how I
figure the thing," he went on, with a final glance at the time-table.
"These two men have got adame istorelle and the young lady-secretary
in their power, safe somewhere in ondon.  They forced madame, last
night, to write that letter to r. arrowell here--we know what they
made her write.  r. arrowell got the small bo containing the jewels,
and hes sent it off, already, by epress delivery, to outhampton.  It
will be there early this evening, and one or other of the men will be
there to meet it.  If aseverie calls for it, Ambrose will be round the
corner.  If Ambrose calls for it, aseverie will be close at hand.
robably theyre already in outhampton--theyd go this morning, to be
on the spot.  As soon as the bo is in their hands theyll be
off--probably to the ontinent, by outhampton and Havre.  They wont
try the Atlantic--the five days voyage would be too risky.  Theyll
make for rance.  ut they wont get to rance--theyll find themselves
in the lock-up at outhampton before bed-time  ou see if that doesnt
come off, gentlemen, as sure as my names what it is.  ow, uigman,
you come with me.  Weve just nice time to catch the one-thirty, and to
get in touch with the outhampton police, and lay our plans and make
our arrangements.  ome time to-night, gentlemen, youll hear from me"

Then atherfield hurried uigman away, and the three men left behind
looked at each other.  r. arrowell was obviously much concerned, and
his hands, thin and nervous, trembled as he began to arrange the papers
on his desk.

"This is a most distressing business, gentlemen," he said.  "It is very
painful to me to think that I have been made an instrument in a crime
of this sort, however innocent a one  ut how could I tell that this
letter was forced out of adame istorelle?  On the face of it----"

"Oh, theres no blame attaching to you, r. arrowell" interrupted
ord orradale.  "On the face of it, the letters genuine enough.  ut
I wanted to ask you a uestion How much do you know of adame
istorelle?  I mean, how often has she employed you?"

"Two or three times only," replied arrowell.  "he came to me first
about an agreement which I had had to send her on behalf of another
client.  he seemed very friendly, and was kind enough to say that net
time she had any legal business she would remember me as she hadnt any
regular solicitor of her own.  I think," he added with a deprecating
smile, "she probably saw that I was beginning, and hadnt much to do."

"I see," said ord orradale, looking round at the somewhat humble
appointments of the office.  "And youve been to that afe eposit
place on her behalf--how often?"

"Twice.  On each occasion adame istorelle wrote her instructions from
abroad.  Once she was in aris.  The other time she was at ice.  The
instructions were similar on both occasions I was to go to the afe
eposit, get a certain parcel or article and post it to an address
given.  The first time I sent a small parcel to Amsterdam--I have the
eact address and name the second, to ew ork.  o that, of course,
when I got adames letter this morning, I saw nothing unusual in it."

"ust so" agreed ord orradale.  "ou wouldnt.  Well, I hope
atherfield will clap the irons on the men who forced her to write it
h, Hetherwick?"

"With all my heart" responded Hetherwick "ut I, too, want to ask r.
arrowell a uestion.  How long," he continued, "have you been here, in
t. artins ane?"

"Oh, four or five years," replied arrowell.

"Then you know this district pretty well, of course.  Have you ever
come across a man whom Ill try to describe to you?"  He went on to
give an accurate, if concise, description of aseverie.  "That man," he
concluded, "is sometimes seen around here."

arrowell nodded.

"I know him" he said.  "In fact, hes been in this very room--to see
me.  ut I dont know his name, nor anything much about him.  He was
brought here by another man and he only stayed a few minutes."

"How much do you know about him--however little?" asked Hetherwick.

"This much.  ou know that people who have invented things come to
solicitors for legal advice, and sometimes to get information as to how
they can best dispose of their inventions?  Well, about nine months ago
a man came to me who claimed to have invented a drop-bottle--that is, a
bottle from which you could only drop one drop of stuff at a time.  He
said such a thing was badly wanted, and that there ought to be a pile
of money in it.  He wanted to know how best to get it on the market.  I
didnt know, but I mentioned the matter to one or two people, and a man
I know--or knew at that time, for hes since dead, unfortunately--said
that he knew a man who was a sort of commission agent for
inventions--took up a good idea, dont you see, and introduced it--and
he promised to bring him to see me.  He brought him the man he brought
was, without doubt, the man you describe.  His name was not mentioned,
but I am sure he was that man.  I dont know what your man is, but I
felt sure that the man I am talking about either was or had been a
medical man."

"Ah" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "What made you think that?"

"rom his conversation--from the remarks he made about the bottle.  He
didnt take it up he said my client was too late and was wrongly
informed into the bargain there was such a thing, and a superior one,
already on the market.  He went away then, and, as I say, I never heard
his name, and Ive never seen him since."

"Thats the man we want" said Hetherwick.  "If atherfield can only
lay hands on him  ut we shall know more by midnight."

Outside, he turned to ord orradale with a shake of the head.

"Were no nearer to any knowledge of where the two women are" he
eclaimed.

"Oh, I dont know" responded ord orradale.  "I think we are, you
know.  ou see, if atherfield nabs those chaps, or even one of them,
he or they will see that the games up, and will give in and say where
their captives are.  Odd business, Hetherwick, that people can be
kidnapped and imprisoned in broad daylight in ondon"

"I dont think anythings impossible or odd--in ondon," answered
Hetherwick dryly.  "If one had only the least idea as to which uarter
of the town that car was driven, one might be doing something"

"ots of sub-sections in every uarter, and subsections again in each
of those," replied ord orradale with eual dryness.  "Take some time
to comb out this town  o  I think we must trust to atherfield.
othing else to trust to, in fact."

ut Hetherwick suddenly thought of apperley.  He began to wonder what
the clerk was after, what his notion had been.  Then he remembered
apperleys admonition to look out for a message about that time, and
ecusing himself from ord orradale, he jumped on a bus and went along
to the Temple.  There, in the letter-bo, he found a telegram

  "eet me ictoria three oclock.  apperley."


Hetherwick set off for ictoria there and then.  ut it was only a
uarter-past two when he got there, and as he had had no lunch, he
turned into the restaurant.  There, when he was half-way through a
chop, apperley found him, and slipped into a chair close by before
Hetherwick noticed his presence.

"Thought I might find you in here, sir," said apperley.  They were
alone in a uiet corner, but the clerk lowered his voice to a whisper.
"Well," he continued, bending across the table, "Ive done a bit,
anyhow."

"In what way?" asked Hetherwick.

apperley produced from his breast pocket some papers, and from amongst
them selected an envelope--the aure-tinted envelope which he had
picked up from the caretakers supper table at t. arys ansions.

"ou recognise this?" he said, with a sly smile.  "ou know where I got
it.  This is the envelope which aseverie took to the caretaker, with
the order to enter adame istorelles flat.  ou knew that I carried
it off, from under the mans nose, last night.  ut you didnt know
why.  I only laughed when you asked me."

"Well, why, then?" inuired Hetherwick.

"This reason," replied apperley.  "We both noticed that the sheet of
paper on which the order had been written by adame had been
shortened--there was no doubt that a printed or embossed address had
been trimmed off, rather roughly, too.  We noticed that, I say, both of
us.  ut I dont think you noticed something far more important--far,
far more important--for our purposes."

"o," admitted Hetherwick.  "I didnt.  What?"

"This," said apperley, turning back the broken flap of the envelope.
"ou didnt notice that here, on the envelope, is the name and address
of the stationer who supplied this stuff  There you are--W. H. alkin,
, roadway, Westminster.  ou never saw that, r. Hetherwick.  ut I
did"

Hetherwick began to comprehend.  He smiled--gratefully.

"mart of you, apperley" he eclaimed.  "I see  And--youve been
there?"

"Ive been there," answered apperley.  "I saw a chance of tracking
these men down.  I couldnt get hold of alkin till nearly noon, but I
got on like a house afire when I did get him.  ou see," he went on,
"that paper is, to start with, of an unusual tint, in colour.
econdly, its of very superior uality, though very thin--intended
chiefly for foreign correspondence.  Thirdly, its epensive.  ow, I
felt certain its use would be limited, and what I wanted to find out
from the stationer was--to whom hed supplied it.  That was easy.  He
recognised the paper and envelope at once.  Of the handwriting on the
paper, he knew nothing whatever--adames writing, you know--that hed
never seen before.  ut he said at once that hed only supplied that
particular make of paper and envelopes to three people, and for each
person hed prepared a die, to emboss the addresses.  The embossing had
been done at his shop, and he showed me specimens of each.  One was for
the owager ady arkentree, , rosvenor ardens.  That was no use.
The second was for iss helandry, , bury treet.  That was out of
count, too.  ut the third was what I wanted.  It was just the address,
, ittle mith treet, .W..  As soon as I saw it, I knew Id got on
the right track."

"o on" said Hetherwick.

"The stationer, alkin, didnt know the name of the man who ordered
this paper and gave this address," continued apperley.  "He knew him
well enough as a customer, though, and described him.  aseverie,
without a doubt  alkin says that aseverie, during the last few
months, bought various items of stationery from him--notebooks,
duplicating paper, office reuisites, and so on.  He never knew his
name, but as he always carried away his own purchases, and paid spot
cash for them, that didnt matter.  alkin supplied him with ten uires
of this paper and envelopes to match, a couple of months ago.
o--there you are  And there I was--sure at last that aseveries
mysterious hiding-place was , ittle mith treet"

"ood--good" said Hetherwick.  "What net?"

"Well, I thought we could do with a bit of help," replied apperley,
smiling.  "o I left alkin--bound to secrecy, of course--and
telephoned to Issy oldmark.  Issy is just the sort of chap for games
of this sort  Issy came--and he and I took a stroll round.  o you
know ittle mith treet?"

"ot I" answered Hetherwick.  "ever heard of it"

"Oh, well, but it is a street," said apperley.  "It lies between reat
mith treet and Tufton treet, back o the hurch House--not so far
from the Abbey.  it slummy down those uarters, round about--sort of
district thats seen decidedly better days.  till, theres good, solid
houses here and there-- is one of em.  rom outside, it looks the
sort of house you cant get into--dark, silent, heavily-curtained
windows--sort of place in which you could murder anybody on the uiet.
ery substantial front door, painted dark green, with an old-fashioned
brass knocker--that sort of house.  We took a good look at it."

"ee anything?" asked Hetherwick.

"othing but what Ive told you--lifeless sort o place," answered
apperley.  "However, having once seen it, I wasnt going to leave it
unwatched, so I posted Issy there, in the window of a convenient
public-house, and came away to telegraph to you.  And there Issy
is--either in his pub, or loafing round.  And now we ought to go and
hear if hes anything to report.  And if he hasnt--what then?"

"ust so," said Hetherwick.  "Thats it--what then?  ut before we do
anything at all, apperley, Id better post you up as to whats
happened elsewhere this morning.  ou see," he continued, when he had
finished his story, "if atherfields theory is correct, and aseverie
has already gone to outhampton to collect that parcel on its arrival,
and if Ambrose has gone with him, we shant find aseverie at this
address.  ut--we might inuire if hes known there."

apperley reflected a while.  Then an idea seemed to suggest itself.

"ay your bill, sir, and lets get out to a ost Office irectory
somewhere," he said.  "Well get the name of the occupier of , ittle
mith treet."

Ten minutes later they were looking down the long columns of names in a
directory apperley suddenly pointed to what they wanted.

"There we are" he said.  "rs. Hannah allett--boarding-house
proprietor."

"ome along" said Hetherwick.  "Well see rs. allett, anyhow."

ut on arrival at ittle mith treet, apperley looked round first,
for his friend, r. oldmark.  r. oldmark materialised
suddenly--apparently from nowhere--and smiled.

"Afternoon, mithter" he said politely to Hetherwick.  "ovely weather,
ithnt it?  Aint theen nothing, apperley, old bean  Aint been a
thoul in or out o that houth, thinth you hopped it  Theemth to me
itth locked up."

"Well see about that," remarked Hetherwick.  "ome with me, apperley.
ou stay here.  oldmark, and keep your eyes as open as before."

He advanced boldly, with the clerk at his heels, to the door of number
, and knocked loudly on the stout panel, supplementing this with a
ring at the bell.  This dual summons was twice repeated--with no result.

"omebody coming" whispered apperley, suddenly.  "olted--inside--as
well as locked"

Hetherwick distinctly heard the sound of a stout bolt being withdrawn,
then of a key being turned.  The door was opened--only a little, but
sufficiently to show them the face and figure of an unusually big
woman, an Amaon in appearance, hard of eye and lip, who glared at them
suspiciously, and as soon as she saw that there were two of them,
narrowed the space through which she inspected her callers.  ut
Hetherwick got a hand on the door and a foot across the threshold.

"rs. allett?" he inuired in a purposely loud voice.  "ust so  Is
octor aseverie in?"

oth men were watching the woman keenly, and they saw that she started
a little, involuntarily.  ut her head shook a ready negative.

"obody of that name here" she answered.

he would have shut the door, but for Hetherwicks foot--he advanced it
further, giving rs. allett a keen, searching glance.

"erhaps you know r. aseverie by another name?" he suggested.
"o--is r. asing in?"

ut the ready shake of the head came again, and the hard eyes grew
harder and more suspicious.

"obody of that name here, either" she said.  "ont know anybody of
those names."

"I think you do," persisted Hetherwick sternly.  He turned to
apperley, purposely.  "We shall have to get the police----"

"ook out, sir" eclaimed apperley, snatching at Hetherwicks arm.
"our fingers"

The woman suddenly banged the door to, narrowly missing Hetherwicks
hand, which he had closed on the edge a second later they heard the
bolt slipped and the key turned.  And Hetherwick, as with a swift
illumination, comprehended things, and turned sharply on his clerk.

"apperley" he eclaimed.  "ure as fate  Those ladies are in there
Trapped"

"houldnt wonder, sir," agreed apperley.  "And as you say--the
police----"

"ome back to oldmark," said Hetherwick.

oing lower down the street and retreating into the shelter of a
doorway, the three men held a rapid consultation, suddenly interrupted
by an eclamation from the ew, who still kept his eyes on the house

"Thelp me if the woman aint leavin that houth" he said.  "Thee
the--thee ith  ockin the door behind her, too  oin up the
thtreet"

Hetherwick looked and saw, and pushed oldmark out of the doorway.

"ollow" he said.  "And for ods sake, dont miss her"




HAT I

TH HO I TH A

The ew silently and promptly set out in the wake of the hurrying
woman presently she and her pursuer disappeared round a corner.

"Thats the result of our call, apperley" said Hetherwick.  "hes
gone somewhere--to tell somebody"

"ikely" assented apperley.  "ut wherever shes gone, Issy
oldmarkll spot her.  Hes the eyes of a lyn."

"He let aseverie slip him, the other night, though," remarked
Hetherwick.

"Well, there was some ecuse for that," said apperley, "to begin with,
he was only instructed to find out where aseverie went, and to end
with he had found out  Hell not let this woman slip him.  hes good
to follow--plenty of her."

"I wish we knew what shed left in that house," said Hetherwick.
"Well have to find out, somehow"

"Thats a police job," replied apperley.  "ant walk into peoples
houses without a warrant.  And you say atherfields on the other
track?  However, I should say that this womans gone off now to find
somebody whos principally concerned--she looked afraid, in my opinion,
when she saw me."

"hes in it, somehow," muttered Hetherwick.

"That house looks mysterious enough for anything.  Well keep a close
watch on it, anyway, until oldmark comes back, however long that may
be."

ut the ew was back within twenty minutes.  o was the woman.  he
came first, hurrying up the street uicker than when she had left it.
As far as the watchers could make out from their vantage point, twenty
yards away from her door, she looked flustered, distressed, upset.
After her, on the opposite pavement, came r. Issy oldmark, his hands
in his pockets.

The woman re-entered the house they heard the door bang.  A moment
later the ew turned into the entry in which Hetherwick and apperley
stood, half hidden from the street.  He smiled, inscrutably.

"Thee her go back to her houth?" he asked.  "Well, I followed.  I thaw
where theeth been, too."

"Where, then?" demanded Hetherwick, impatiently.

oldmark jerked his head in the direction from whence he had come.

"ound that corner," he said, "you get into a regular thlum.  ittle
thtreeth, alleyth, pathageth, and tho on.  In one of em, a narrow
plathe, where thereth a thort of open-air market, thereth a good
thithed pieth of blank wall, with an iron-fathend door in it.  Well,
the woman went in there--let herthelf in with a key that thee took from
her pocket.  Ath thoon ath theed gone in, I took a clother look.  The
doorth fathend with iron, or thteel, ath I thaid--jolly thtrong.
There aint no name on it, and no keyhole that you can look through.
The wallth a good nine or ten feet high, and itth covered with broken
glath at the top.  ot a nithe plathe to get into, nohow"

"Well?" inuired Hetherwick.  "he went in?"

"Went in, ath I thay, mithter, and the door clothed on her.  After Id
taken a glimpth at the door I got a potht behind one of the thtalls in
the thtreet and watched.  he came out again in about ten
minitth--looked to me, too, ath if thee hadnt had a very plethant time
inthide.  pthet  And thee thet off back here, fathter than vhat thee
came.  ow theeth gone into her houth again--ath you no doubt thaw.
And thatth all.  ut if I wath you, mithter," concluded Issy, "I
should jutht find out vhat there ith behind that door and the wall
itth thet in--I thhould tho"

"Thats a police job," said apperley once more.  "If wed only got
atherfield with us, we could----"  Hetherwick paused--thinking.  "ook
here, apperley," he continued, with a sudden inspiration.  "I know
what well do  ou get a tai-cab, as uickly as possible.  rive to
the police station where I usually meet atherfield.  Theres another
man there whom I know, and whos pretty well up in this
business--etective-ergeant obmore.  Ask for him.  Tell him what
weve discovered, and ask him to come back with you and to bring
another man if he thinks it necessary.  ow then, oldmark  Tell
apperley eactly where this place is."

The ew pointed along the street to its first corner.

"ound that corner," he said.  "irtht turning to the right then
firtht to the left then firtht to the right--thatth the thpot.
otth o little thtallth in it--a bithy, crowded plathe."

"idnt ye notice the name?" demanded apperley, half scoldingly.

"To be thure I did" grinned oldmark.  "encove Thtreet.  ut itth
better to dethcribe it than to name it.  And dont you go tellin no
tackthy-driver to drive you in there--cauth there aint room"

apperley gave no answer to this piece of advice he shot off in the
direction of ictoria treet, and Hetherwick turned to the ew.

"Well go and have another look at this place, oldmark," he said.
"ut well go separately--as long as were in this street, anyway.  ou
stroll off to that first corner, and Ill join you."

He crossed the street when the ew had lounged away, and once more took
a narrow look at the house into which the big woman had vanished.  It
was as close barred and curtained as ever a veritable place of
mystery.  or a moment Hetherwick doubted whether he ought to leave it
unwatched.  ut the descriptions of the wall and door in encove treet
had ecited his imagination, and he went on, turned the corner, and
rejoined oldmark.  oldmark at once went in front, piloting him into a
mae of unusually dirty and crowded streets, and finally into one,
narrower than the rest, on each side of which were tent-like stalls
whereon all manner of cheap wares were being offered for sale by
raucous-voiced vendors.  He saw at once that this was one of those
open-air markets of which there are many in the poorer neighbourhoods
of ondon, and wherein you can buy a sipenny frying-pan as readily as
a paper of fried fish, and a gay neckerchief alongside a damaged orange.

Threading his way behind Issy, and between the thronged stalls and the
miserable shops that lined the pavement, Hetherwick presently came to
the piece of blank wall of which the ew had told him.  The houses and
shops round about were old and dilapidated, but the wall was either
modern or had been rebuilt and strengthened.  It stretched between two
low houses, one used as a grocers, the other as a hardware shop.  In
length, it was some thirty feet in height, uite ten its coping, as
oldmark had said, was liberally embattled with broken glass.  The
door, set flush with the adjoining masonry, was a solid affair, faced
with metal, newly painted, and the lock was evidently a patent one.  A
significant fact struck Hetherwick at once--there was no sign of a bell
and none of a knocker.

"ou say the woman let herself in here?" he asked, as he and Issy
paused.

"Thatth it, mithter Hetherwick--let herthelf in," replied Issy.  "I
thee her take the key from her pocket."

Hetherwick glanced at the top of the wall.

"I wonder whats behind?" he muttered.  "uilding of some sort, of
course."  He turned to a man whose stall stood just in front of the
mysterious door, and who at that moment had no trade.  "o you know
anything about this place?" he asked.  "o you know whats behind this
wall?  What building it is?"

The stall-keeper eyed Hetherwick over, silently and carefully.
eciding that he was an innocent person and not a policeman in plain
clothes, he found his tongue.

"I dont, guvnor" he answered.  "Aint a bloomin notion  I been
comin here, or hereabouts, this three year or more, but I aint never
seen behind that wall, nor in at that there doorway.  elp me"

"ut I suppose youve seen people go in and come out of the door?"
suggested Hetherwick.  "It must be used for something"

"I reckon it is, guvnor, but I dont call nobody to mind, though, to
be sure, I see a woman come out of it a while ago--big, heavy-jawed
woman, she was.  ut ueer as it may seem, I dont call to mind ever
seeing anybody else.  ou see, guvnor, I comes here at about ten
oclock of a morning, and I packs up and ops it at five--if theres
folks comes in and out o that spot, it must be early in a morning and
late at night, and so I shouldnt see em.  ut its my belief this
here wall and door is back premises to something--the front o the
placell be on the other side."

"Thats a good idea," said Hetherwick, with a glance at oldmark.
"ets go round."

ut there was no going round.  Although they tried various alleys and
passages and streets that ought to have been parallel to encove
treet, they failed to find any place that could be a frontage to the
mysterious wall and its close-set door.  ut the ews alert faculties
asserted themselves.

"We can thee vhatth behind that vail, mithter, eathy enough if we get
one o them thop-keeperth oppothit to let uth go upthtairth to hith
firtht floor," he said.  "ook right acroth the thtreet there, thtallth
and all, into vhatever there ith.  Try that one," he went on, pointing
to a greengrocers establishment which faced the close-set door.  "Tell
him were doin a bit o land thurveyin--which ith thtrue"

Hetherwick made his reuest--the greengrocers lady showed him and
oldmark upstairs into a bow-windowed parlour, one of those dismal
apartments which are only used on undays, for the purpose of adding
more gloom to a gloomy day.  he observed that there was a nice view
both ways of the street, but Hetherwick confined his inspection to the
front.  He saw across the wall easily enough, now.  There was little to
see.  The wall bounded a yard, bounded on its left and right sides by
the walls of the adjoining houses, and at its further etremity by a
low, suat building of red brick, erected against the rear of a high,
windowless wall beyond.  rom its mere aspect, it was impossible to
tell what this suat, flat-roofed structure was used for.  Its
door--closed--was visible visible, too, were the windows on either
side.  ut it was easy to see that they were obscured, as to their
lower halves, by coats of dark paint.  There was no sign over the
building no outward indication of its purpose.  In the yard, however,
were crates, boes, and carboys in wicker cases a curiously-shaped
chimney, projecting from the roof above, suggested the presence of a
furnace or forge beneath.  And Hetherwick, after another look, felt no
doubt that he was gaing at the place to which Hannaford had been
taken, and where he had been skilfully poisoned.

oldmark suddenly nudged his arm, and nodded at the crowded street
below.

"apperley" he whispered.  "And two men with him"

Hetherwick, glancing in the direction indicated, saw obmore and
another man, both in plain clothes, making their way down the street,
between the stalls and the shops.  With them, and in close
conversation, was a uniformed constable.  He turned to leave the room,
but oldmark again touched his elbow.

"efore we go, mithter," he said, "jutht take another glanth at that
plathe oppothite, and itths thurroundinth.  I thee where we can get
in  ye thee, mithter Hetherwick, the wall between that yard and the
net houth--the right-hand thide one--ith fairly low at the far end.
ow, if the man in that houth would let uth go through to hith
back-yard--vhat?"

"I see" agreed Hetherwick.  "Well try it.  ut obmore first--come
along."

He slipped some silver into the hand of the green-grocers lady, and
went down to the street.  A few brief eplanations to the two
detectives supplemented the information already given them by
apperley, and then obmore nodded at the constable who stood by,
eagerly interested.

"Weve been talking to him, r. Hetherwick," he said.  "Hes sometimes
on day duty here, and sometimes hes on night.  He says hes often
wondered about this place, and its a very ueer thing that though hes
known this district more than a year, hes never seen a soul go in or
out of that door, and hasnt the least notion of what business, if it
is a business, is carried on there"

"ever seen anything or anybody" corroborated the constable.  "At any
time--day or night.  When I first came on this beat, maybe fifteen
months ago, that door had been newly set and painted, and the glass had
just been stuck a-top of the wall.  ut its a fact--Ive never seen
anybody go in or come out"

"I propose to go in," said Hetherwick.  "I think weve abundant cause,
knowing what we do.  It may be that the two missing ladies are there.
Ive been having a look into the yard, and we could get into it easily
by going through the grocers shop there, on the right, and climbing
the wall from his back premises.  What do you say, obmore?"

"Oh, I think so" agreed obmore.  "ow were on the job, well carry
it through.  etter let me tackle the grocer, r. Hetherwick--Ill see
him first and then call you in."

The other waited while obmore entered the shop and spoke with its
owner.  They saw him engaged in conversation for several minutes then
he came to the door and beckoned the rest to approach.

"Thats all right," he said in an aside to Hetherwick.  "We can go
through to his back-yard, and hell lend us a step-ladder to get over
the wall.  ut hes told me a bit--he knows the two men who have this
place in the net yard, and theres no doubt at all, from his
description of them, that ones Ambrose and the other aseverie.  He
says theyve had the place almost eighteen months, and he thinks they
use it as a laboratory--chemicals, or something of that sort.  ut he
says theyre rarely seen--sometimes hes never seen them for days and
even weeks together.  sually theyre there of a night--hes seen
lights in the place at all hours of the night.  Well--come on"

The posse of investigators filed through the dark little shop to a yard
at its rear, the grocers apprentice going in front with a step-ladder,
which he planted against the intervening wall at its lowest point.  One
by one, the uniformed constable going first, the si men climbed and
dropped over.  ut for their own presence, the place seemed deserted
and lifeless.  As Hetherwick had observed from the greengrocers
parlour the windows were obscured by thick coats of paint
nevertheless, two or three of the men approached and tried to find
places from which the paint had been scratched, in an effort to see
what lay inside.  ut the constable, bolder and more direct, went
straight to the entrance.

"oors open" he eclaimed.  "ot even shut"  He pushed the door
wide, and went into the building, the rest crowding after him.
"Hullo" he shouted.  "Hullo"

o answer came to the summons.  The constable crossed the lobby in
which they were all standing, and opened an inner door.  And Hetherwick
saw at once that the grocers surmise as to the purpose to which the
place was put had been correct--this was a chemical laboratory, well
euipped, too, with modern apparatus.  ut there was not a sign of life
in it.

"obody here, apparently," murmured one of the men.  "lown"

obmore went forward to another door, and opening it, revealed a room
furnished as an office.  There was a roll-top desk in it, and papers
and documents lying there he and Hetherwick began to finger and
eamine them.  And Hetherwick suddenly saw something that made a link
between this mysterious place and the house he had called at earlier in
the afternoon.  There, before his eyes, lay some of the aure-tinted
notepaper which apperley had traced with the embossed address on it of
which the stationer had told.

"Theres no doubt weve hit on the place at last, obmore," he said.
"I wish wed had atherfield here.  ut----"

efore he could say more, a sudden shout came from oldmark, who, while
the others were investigating the lower regions, had courageously, and
alone, gone up the low staircase to the upper rooms.

"ithter" he called.  "ithter Hetherwick come up here--come up, all
of you.  Hereth a man here, a-thittin in a chair--and thelp me if I
dont believe heth a thtiff un--dead"




HAT 

A

The rest of the searchers, hearing that startled cry from the ew, with
one accord made for the upper part of the building.  obmore and
Hetherwick reached him first he was standing at the half-opened door
of a room, into which he was staring with eager eyes.  They pushed by
him and entered.

Hetherwick took in the general aspect and contents of that room at a
glance.  It had been fitted up--recently, he thought, from certain
small evidences--as a bed-sitting-room.  A camp-bed stood in one
corner there was a washstand, a dressing table, a chest of drawers,
two or three pictures, a shelf of books, a small suare of carpet in
the centre of the floor, the outer edges of which had been roughly and
newly stained.  On the bed lay, open, a suit-case, already packed with
clothes and linen by it lay an overcoat, hat, gloves, umbrella it was
evident that the man to whom it belonged had completed his preparations
for a departure, and had nothing to do but to close and lock the
suit-case, put on his overcoat and hat, pick up the other things and go
away.

ut the man himself?  There was a big, old-fashioned easy chair at the
side of the bed--a roomy, comfortable affair.  A man lay, rather than
sat, in it, in an attitude which suggested that he had dropped there as
with a sudden weariness, laid his head back against the padded cushion,
and--gone to sleep.  ut the men knew, all of them, as they crowded
into that room, that it was no sleep that they had broken in upon--it
was death.  This, as the ew had been uick to see, was a dead
man--dead

Hetherwick took him in as uickly as he had taken in his surroundings.
His head lay uietly against the padding of the chair, a little
inclined to his left shoulder the face was fully visible.  It was--to
Hetherwick--the face of a stranger in all his and atherfields
investigations it had not been described to them.  et he was certain
that he was looking on the man known to them by repute as Ambrose.
isguised, of course--he had shaved off the dark beard and moustache of
which they had heard, and he could see at once that the loss of them
had made a remarkable difference in his appearance.  ut nothing could
disguise his height and general build.  This, without doubt, was the
man atherfield and he had hunted for, the man who had met Hannaford at
ictoria, who had disappeared from his flat in the Adelphi--the man who
was associated with aseverie, and who----

"ead as a door-nail" muttered obmore, bending close to the still
figure.  "And--hes been dead a good bit, too--some hours, anyway.
tiff  o ye know him, r. Hetherwick?"

Hetherwick said what he thought.  obmore pointed to the things on the
bed.

"ooks as if hed been taken with a seiure just as he was about to set
off somewhere," he remarked.  "Well, if this is the r. Ambrose weve
been seeking--but lets see if hes got anything on him to prove his
identity."

While the rest of the men stood by watching, he put his hand into the
dead mans inside breast pocket--he was wearing a smart, brand-new grey
tweed suit, Hetherwick, later on, remembered how its newness struck him
as being incongruously out of place, somehow--and drew out a
pocket-book.  Touching Hetherwicks elbow and motioning him to follow
him, he went over to the window, leaving the others still staring
wonderingly at the dead man.

"This is a ueer business, r. Hetherwick," he whispered as they drew
apart.  "ou think this is the r. Ambrose we were after?"

"ure of it" answered Hetherwick.  "Hes shaved off his beard and
moustache, and thats no doubt made a big difference in his appearance,
but you may depend on it, this is the man  ut whats caused his
sudden death?"

Then a keen, vivid recollection flashed up in him, and he turned
sharply, glancing at the rigid figure in the background.

"What is it?" asked obmore curiously.  "omething strikes you?"

Hetherwick pointed to the dead mans attitude.

"Thats--thats just how Hannaford looked when he died in the railway
carriage" he whispered.  "After the first signs--you know--he laid
back and--died.  ust like that--as if hed dropped uietly asleep.
an--can it be that----"

"I know what youre thinking," muttered obmore.  "oisoned
Well--what about--eh--the other man?"

"aseverie" eclaimed Hetherwick.

"Why not?--to rid himself of an accomplice  ut--this pocket-book,"
said obmore.  "ets see whats in it.  oesnt seem to be anything
very much, by the thinness."

rom one flap of the pocket-book he drew out a wad of carefully-folded
bank notes, and rapidly turned them over.

"Hundred and fifty pounds there," he remarked.  "And whats this
paper--a draft on a ew ork bank for two hundred.  ew ork, eh?  o
thats where he was bound?  And this," he went on, turning out the
other flap.  "Ah see this, r. Hetherwick?  Hed got his passage
booked by the aratic, sailing to-night.  m  And atherfields gone
to outhampton, after aseverie.  Im beginning to see a bit into this,
I think."

"What do you see?" asked Hetherwick.

"Well, it looks to me as if aseverie had gone ahead to collect that
bo containing the jewels, and that Ambrose was to follow later, join
him there, when aseverie had secured the loot, and that they were then
to be off with their harvest  ut--do you notice this--the name under
which the passage is booked?  ot Ambrose--harles Andrews, suire.
Andrews  And aseverie is asing.  asing and Andrews.  ow I wonder
if they carried on business here under these names?"

"Thats an unimportant detail," said Hetherwick.  "The important thing,
surely, is--that  How did that man come by his death?"

"Well, but I dont think that is very important--just now," replied
obmore.  "After all, he is dead, and whether he died as the result of
a sudden seiure, or whether aseverie cleverly poisoned him before he
left, is a uestion well have to settle later.  ut Ill tell you
what, r. Hetherwick--Ill lay anything he didnt poison himself  ook
round--there isnt a sign of anything hes been drinking out of.  o,
sir--the other mans done this.  And if atherfield has the luck to lay
hands on him to-night--ah  ut now, what was this your clerk,
apperley, told us as we came along about the ittle mith treet
landlady coming here this afternoon?"

"he was followed here by oldmark," replied Hetherwick.  "oldmark saw
her admit herself by a key which she took from her pocket.  he stayed
inside a few minutes, came out looking much upset, and hurried away to
her own house."

"And now you and Ill just hurry after her," said obmore.  "After all,
shes living, and well make her find her tongue.  Of course, she came
in here epecting to find this man, and to tell him somebody was on the
look-out.  And--she found him dead  ome round there with me, r.
Hetherwick, at once."

He turned to the other detective and the constable, and after giving
them some whispered instructions, left the room, Hetherwick, after a
word or two with apperley, following him.  ut before they had reached
the outer door, they heard steps in the yard, and suddenly two men
appeared in the doorway.

If Hetherwick and his companion looked uestioningly at these two men,
they, on their part, looked uestioningly at obmore and Hetherwick.
They were youngish men--Hetherwick set them down as respectably-dressed
artisans.  That they were surprised to find anyone confronting them at
the door whereat all four now stood, was evident their surprise,
indeed, was so great that they came to a sudden halt, staring silently.
ut obmore spoke.  "Wanting somebody?" he asked sharply.

The two strangers echanged a glance, and the apparently elder one
replied

"Well, no" he said.  "ot that we know of.  ut might we ask if you
are?  And how you got in here?  ecause this place happens to be ours"

"ours" eclaimed obmore.  "our property?

"Well, if buying it, paying for it, and taking a receipt and papers
makes it so" answered the man.  "ought it this morning--and settled
up for it, too, anyway."

obmore produced and handed over a professional card, and the faces of
the two men fell as they read it.  The elder looked up uickly.

"I hope theres nothing wrong?" he said aniously.  "etectives, eh?
Weve laid out a nice bit on this--savings, too, and----"

"I dont suppose theres anything wrong that way," replied obmore
reassuringly.  "ut theres something uncommonly wrong in other ways.
ow look here, who are you two, and from whom did you buy this place?"

"y names arshall, his is Wilkinson," answered the leader.  "Were
just starting business for ourselves as electrical engineers.  We
advertised for a likely place hereabouts, and r. Andrews came to us
about this--said he and his partner, r. asing, were leaving, and
wanted to sell it, just as it stood.  We came to look at it, and as
its just the place we need to start with, we agreed to buy it.  They
said it was their own property, and to save law epenses we carried out
the purchase between ourselves.  And we paid over the purchase money
this morning, and got the papers and the key."

"What time was that?" asked obmore.

"Ten oclock or thereabouts," replied arshall.  "y appointment, here."

"id ye see both men--asing and Andrews?"

"oth  In that little room to the right.  We settled the
business--paid them in cash--and settled all up.  It was soon done,
then they stood us a drink and a cigar, and we went."

"tood you a drink, eh?" said obmore suddenly.  "Where?"

"Here  asing, he pulled out a big bottle of champagne and a
cigar-bo, and said wed wet the bargain.  Wed a glass apiece,
Wilkinson and me, then we left em to finish the bottle we were in a
hurry.  ut--is anything wrong?"

"What is wrong, my lad, is that the man you know as Andrews is lying
dead upstairs" replied obmore.  "oisoned, most likely, by his
partner.  ut, as I said just now, I dont suppose theres anything
wrong about your buying the property, providing you can show a title to
it you say youve got the necessary papers?"

arshall clapped a hand on the pocket of his coat.

"ot em all here, now," he said.  "ut--did you say Andrews was
dead--poisoned?  Why, he was as alive as I am when we left the two of
em together.  They were finishing the bottle----"

"ook here," interrupted obmore.  "Wait awhile until we come
back--weve some important work close by.  There are people of ours
upstairs--tell them I said you were to wait a bit.  ow, r.
Hetherwick."

Outside the yard and in the crowded street, obmore turned to his
companion with a cynical laugh.

"hampagne--to wet the bargain" he said.  "eft them to finish it, eh?
And no doubt what finished Ambrose was in that champagne--slipped in by
aseverie when his back was turned.  Ill tell you what it is, r.
Hetherwick, that chaps a thorough-paced un--he goes the whole hog  I
only hope he wont be too deep for atherfield at outhampton  I shall
be anious till I hear."

"Is it possible for him to escape atherfield?" eclaimed Hetherwick.
"How can he?  I look on him as being as good as in custody already
Hes bound to call at the post office for that bo."

"Is he, though?" interrupted the detective, with another incredulous
laugh.  "Im not so sure about that, r. Hetherwick.  aseverie is
evidently an accomplished scoundrel, and full of all sorts of tricks
Ill tell ye what Im wondering--will that parcel ever get to
outhampton post office, where its to be called for?"

"Whatever do you mean?" demanded Hetherwick.  "Its in the post
osted this morning."

"o doubt," agreed obmore dryly.  "y special delivery, eh?  And when
it gets to outhampton tation, its got to be taken to the head post
office, hasnt it?"

"Well?" asked Hetherwick.

"Theres many a slip twit cup and lip--so the old saying goes,"
replied obmore.  "That parcel may slip.  ut isnt this the number
your clerk mentioned?"

The door of rs. alletts house looked more closely barred than
ever--if possible.  And no answer came to several summonses by bell and
knocker.  ut presently obmore tried the handle--the door opened at
his touch.

"Hallo" he eclaimed.  "Open  m  That seems a bit ueer.
Well--inside"

or the second time that afternoon, Hetherwick walked into a place that
seemed to be wholly deserted.




HAT I

WATOO

The detective, walking a little in advance of his companion, stepped
forward to a hall-table and knocked loudly on its polished surface.  o
answer came.  He went further along, to the head of a railed stair
which evidently communicated with a cellar kitchen again he knocked,
more loudly than before, on an adjacent panel, and again got no reply.
And at that, turning back along the hall, he opened the door of the
room which faced upon the street, and he and Hetherwick looked in.  A
musty-smelling, close-curtained room that, a sort of unday parlour,
little used, cold and comfortless in its formality.  ut the room
behind it, to which obmore turned net, showed signs of recent
occupancy and life.  There was a fire in the grate, with an easy chair
drawn near to it on the table close by lay womens gear--a heap of
linen, with needle and thread thrust in, a work-basket, scissors,
thimble it reuired no more than a glance to see that the owner of
these innocent matters had laid them down suddenly, suddenly
interrupted in her task.

"Ill tell you what it is, r. Hetherwick" eclaimed obmore abruptly.
"This house is empty  mpty of people, anyway."

"ilent enough, to be sure," agreed Hetherwick.  "The woman----"

"ouve frightened her by calling here," said obmore.  "Then she
slipped round to encove treet.  And there she found Ambrose dead
hes some connection with him and aseverie, because she possesses a
key that admits to that yard.  And finding Ambrose dead, she came back
here, got her things and cleared out.  There isnt a soul in this
house.  Ill lay anything on that"

"It struck me that this might be the place where the two ladies were
detained," remarked Hetherwick.

"Well soon see about that," declared obmore.  "ome upstairs--well
search the place from top to bottom.  ut stop, downstairs first."

He ran down the stair to the cellar kitchen, with Hetherwick at his
heels.  And at the door he laughed, pointing within.

"ook there" he eclaimed.  "I told you youd interrupted things.
ee theres one tea-tray, laid out all ready for two--cups and
saucers, teapot, bread and butter cut, cake.  Theres another for one.
And theres the kettle, singing away like a bird on a bough.  Whats
that mean?  The woman was going to carry up tea for two, somewhere
tother tray was for herself.  Well, you nipped that in the bud shell
have to get her tea somewhere.  ut--the others?  ome upstairs."

oing back to the hall, he led the way up the main staircase.  There
were two stories above the ground floor on the first were rooms the
doors of which, being opened, or being found open, revealed nothing but
ordinary things of these rooms there were three, opening off a main
landing.  ut on the net floor there were only two rooms one was
unfurnished at the door of the other, a few inches ajar, the detective
immediately paused.

"ook you there, now, r. Hetherwick" he said, pointing here and
there.  "Heres recent work  o you see that a strong bolt, more like
a bar, has been fitted on the outside of this door, and the door itself
fitted with a new patent lock, key outside?  And, good ord a chain as
well.  ight be in a gaol  ut whats inside?"

He pushed the door open and revealed a large room, fitted with two
small beds, easy chairs, a table on which books, magaines, newspapers
lay on the table, too, was fancy-work which, it was evident, had been
as hastily laid aside as the sewing downstairs.  Hetherwick bent over
the things, but obmore went to the one window.

"aol, did I say?" he eclaimed.  "Why, this is a gaol  ook here, r.
Hetherwick--window morticed inside and fitted with iron bars outside.
ven if whoevers been in here could have opened the window, and if
thered been no bars there, they couldnt have done anything though,
for theres nothing but a high blank wall opposite--back of some
factory or other, apparently.  ut whats this?" he added, opening a
door that stood in a corner.  "m small bathroom.  And this," he
continued, going to a suare hatch set in the wall net to the
staircase.  "Ah trap big enough to hand things like small trays
through, but not big enough for a grown person to sueee through.
Well, I shouldnt wonder if youre right, r. Hetherwick--this,
probably, is where these ladies were locked up.  ut--theyre gone"

Hetherwick was looking round.  uddenly his eyes lighted on a familiar
object.  He stepped forward, and from a chair near one of the beds,
picked up a handbag of green silk.  He knew it well enough.

"That settles it" he eclaimed.  "They have been here  This is iss
Han--I mean iss eatherstones bag--Ive seen her carry it often.
These are her things in it--purse, card-case, so on.  hes left it
behind her."

"Aye, just so" agreed obmore.  "As I say, they all left in a hurry.
I figure it out like this the woman, who, of course, acted as sort of
gaoler to these two unfortunate ladies, when she made that discovery
round yonder, came back here, got her outdoor things, and cleared off.
ut before she went, shed the decency to slip up here, undo that
chain, slip the bolt back, and turn the key  Then, no doubt, she made
tracks at epress speed, leaving the ladies to do what they liked.  And
they, r. Hetherwick, having a bit o common sense about em, did what
I should ha done--they hooked it as uick as possible.  Thats that,
sir"

Hetherwick thrust honas handbag into his pocket and made for the door.

"Then Im off, obmore," he said.  "I must try to find out where
theyve gone.  Ive an idea probably theyd go to enteneys office.
Ill go there.  ut--you?"

"Oh, Im going back to encove treet," answered obmore.  "lenty to
do there.  ut off you go after the ladies, r. Hetherwick, theres
nothing you can do round here now.  Ill keep that clerk of yours a
bit, and the ew chap--they might come in.  We shall have some nice
revelations in the papers to-morrow, Im thinking, especially if
atherfield has the luck he epects."

"What are you going to do about this house?" asked Hetherwick as they
went downstairs.  "o you think the woman will come back?"

"et your life she wont" answered obmore.  "ot she  I should think
shes half-way across ondon--north, south, east or west, by this.
House?  Why, I shall just lock the front door and put the key in my
pocket.  We shall want to search this house narrowly."

Hetherwick bade him good-day for the time being, and hurried off to
ictoria treet, to fling himself into the first disengaged tai-cab he
encountered, and to bid its driver go as speedily as possible to
incolns Inn ields.  He was anious about hona--and yet he felt that
she was safe.  And he was inuisitive, too he wanted to hear her
story, to find out what had happened behind the scenes.  He felt sure
of finding her at enteneys office she and adame istorelle, once
released from their prison, would naturally go there.

ut the clerk whom he encountered as soon as he rushed into the outer
office, damped his spirits at once by shaking his head.

"r. enteneys not in, sir," he answered.  "He was in until not so
long ago, but he got a telephone call and went out immediately
afterwards.  o, I dont know who it was that rang him up, r.
Hetherwick, nor where he went seemed a bit ecited when he went out,
and was in a fearful hurry."

Hetherwick concluded that adame istorelle had summoned enteney, and
that he had gone to meet her and hona.  He went away, somewhat at a
loss--then, remembering that atherfield had promised to wire from
outhampton, he turned towards his chambers.  At the foot of the stairs
he met his caretaker.

"een a young lady here inuiring for you, r. Hetherwick," said the
man.  "een here twice.  I said I didnt know when youd be in--any
time or no time.  he said--but there is the young lady, sir--coming
back"

Hetherwick turned sharply and saw hona coming across the suare.
Hurrying to meet her and disregarding whatever eyes might be watching
them, he took both her hands in his in a fashion that brought the
colour to her cheeks.

"oure all right--safe?" he asked uickly.

"ure?"

"Im all right and uite safe, thank you," she answered.  "I--Ive been
here twice before, but you were out.  I came to borrow some money.  I
left my bag and purse in--the place where we were locked up, and----"

Hetherwick pulled out the handbag and silently gave it to her.  he
stared at him.

"ouve been--there" she eclaimed.  "How----"

"ot in this afternoon, an hour ago," he answered.  "Here, come up to
my rooms  We cant stand talking here.  adame istorelle--wheres
she?"

"I left her at ictoria, telephoning to ajor enteney," replied hona.
"he, too, had no money.  he wanted me to wait until ajor enteney
arrived, but I wouldnt.  I walked here.  I--I thought youd want to
know that wed got out--at last."

Hetherwick said nothing until they had entered his sitting-room.  Then,
staring silently at her, he put his hands on honas shoulders, and
after a long look at her, suddenly and impulsively bent and kissed her.

"y gad" he said in a low voice.  "I didnt know how anious I was
about you until I saw you just now  ut--now I know"

Then, just as suddenly, he turned away from her, and in a
matter-of-fact manner lighted his stove, put on a kettle of water, and
began preparations which indicated his intention of making tea.  hona,
from an easy chair into which he had unceremoniously thrust her,
watched him.

"iberty" she said suddenly.  "Were both discovering something.  When
youve been locked up, day and night, for a while----"

"How was it?" he asked, turning on her.  "Of course, we know all about
the kidnapping--but the rest, until to-day?  aseverie, of course?"

"aseverie and another man," she answered.  "A tall, clean-shaven man,
whose name we never heard.  ut aseverie was the chief villain.  As to
how it was, they met us at the sunk road at iversreade, forced us at
the point of revolvers into a car, and drove us off to ondon--to
Westminster--and into a house there, the house youve been in.
There----"

"A moment," said Hetherwick, who was finding cups and saucers.  "The
driver of that car?  He must have been an accomplice."

"o doubt, but we never saw him again.  We only saw those two and a
woman who acted as gaoler and brought our meals.  We were fed all
right, and they gave us books and papers, and actually provided us with
fancy work.  ut they were ineorable about madame and her jewels.
They must have known all about them, because they got her own
notepaper----"

"I know all about that," said Hetherwick.  "Ill tell you my side of it
when youve had some tea.  orced her, I suppose, to write the letters?"

"They forced her to do that just as they forced us into the car," said
hona, "with revolvers  And--they meant it.  I suppose theyve got the
jewels now?"

"emains to be seen," replied Hetherwick.  "id adame istorelle
happen to tell you what those jewels were worth?"

"he talked about little else.  etween eighty and ninety thousand
pounds.  hes in an awful state about them.  ut it was literally a
uestion of her life or her jewels.  I dont know what theyd have done
with me.  ut now--Im all right"

Hetherwick opened a tin bo, and producing a plum cake, held it up for
hona to inspect.

"What dyou think of that for a cake?" he asked admiringly.  "resent
from my old aunt in the country--real, proper cake that.  es," he went
on, setting the cake on the table, "yes, yes youre all right now.
ut, by eorge----"

hona said nothing she saw that his relief at seeing her was greater
and deeper than he cared to show.  he poured out the tea they sat
discussing the recent events until dusky shadows began to fall over the
whole room.

"I ought to be getting back to iversreade," she remarked at last.
"Its late."

"Wait a bit" said Hetherwick, who by that time had told her all he
knew.  "Therell be a wire from atherfield before long.  ont go down
to iversreade to-night.  Telephone to ady iversreade that youre
staying in town.  Her sister will be there by now, and will have told
her everything.  Wait till we get the wire from atherfield then well
go and dine somewhere, and you can put up at your old hotel in urrey
treet for the night.  I want you to know whats happened at
outhampton and----"

He broke off as a knock came at his outer door.

"Thatll be atherfields wire," he eclaimed "ow then----"

A moment later he came back to her with the message in his hand.

"It is from atherfield," he said.  "Handed in outhampton West
si-nineteen.  oesnt say if hes got him  All he says is eet me
Waterloo, arriving eight-twenty.  Well----"

"I wonder?" said hona.  "ut aseverie is----"

"ust what obmore says," muttered Hetherwick.

"However--" he looked at his watch.  "ome along," he continued.
"Weve just time to get some dinner--at Waterloo--and to be on the
platform when the eight-twenty comes in.  If only we could see
aseverie in charge of atherfield and uigman first it would give me
an appetite"

The vast space between the station buildings and the entrance to the
platform at Waterloo was thronged when Hetherwick and hona came out of
the restaurant at ten minutes past eight.  Hetherwick was inuiring as
to which platform the outhampton train would come in at when he felt a
light touch on his arm.  Turning sharply he saw obmore.  obmore gave
him a uiet smile, coupled with an informing wink.

"uess youre on the same job, r. Hetherwick," he said.  "Wire from
atherfield, eh?"

"es," replied Hetherwick.  "And you?"

"ame here," assented obmore.  "ust to say I was to be here for the
eight-twenty--with help," he added significantly.  "Ive got the help
theres four of us round about.  Heard anything of those ladies, r.
Hetherwick?"

"Here is one of them," replied Hetherwick, indicating hona.  "Theyre
safe.  oull hear all about it later.  ut this business--what do you
make of atherfields wire?  Has he failed?"

"Ill tell you what I make of it," answered obmore.  "I think youll
find that aseverie is on the train, with atherfield and uigman in
close attendance.  or some reason of his own, atherfield means to
arrest aseverie here--here  Thats how I figure it.  Theyve seen
aseverie there and decided to follow him back to town.  As soon as
that trains in----"

A sudden, sharp eclamation from hona interrupted him and made both
men turn to her.  he clutched Hetherwicks arm, at the same time
pointing with the other hand across the space behind them.

"aseverie--himself" she said.  "There--under that clock  ee  Hes
going towards the gates"

With a swift and unceremonious gesture obmore laid a hand on honas
shoulder, twisted her round and drew her amongst a group of bystanders.

"eep out of sight, miss" he muttered.  "Hell know you  ow,
again--which man.  That with the pale face and high hat?  I see him.
ood to remember, too.  All right  top here, you two.  If he moves in
this direction, r. Hetherwick, move away anywhere.  Wait"

obmore slipped away.  A moment later they saw him speak to a couple of
uiet-looking men, who presently glanced at aseverie.  Hetherwick was
watching aseverie, too.  aseverie, uiet, unconcerned, evidently
wholly unsuspicious, had taken up a position at the eit through which
the outhampton passengers must emerge he was smoking a cigar,
placidly, with obvious appreciation.

"oure certain thats the man?" whispered Hetherwick.

"aseverie?  ositive" declared hona.  "As if I could mistake him
Ive too good reason to remember his whole appearance.  ut--here
aring"

"Well," said Hetherwick, "somethings going to happen  eep back--keep
well back  We can see things from here without being seen.  If he
caught sight of you----"

obmore came strolling back and joined them.

"All right" he murmured.  "our pairs of eyes, beside ours--thats
three pairs more--on him  y men are close up to him, too.  ee em?
One, two, three, four  All round him, though he doesnt know.  I
shant let him go, whether atherfield turns up or not.  ool customer,
eh?"

"The trains due," said Hetherwick.  He had honas hand within his
arm, and he felt it tremble.  "es," he whispered, bending down to her,
"thats how I feel.  Tense moment, this.  ut that scoundrel there----"

aseverie was glancing at the big clock.  He turned from it to the
platform behind the gates, looking epectantly along its lighted
surface.  The others looked, too.  A minute passed.  Then, out of the
gloom at the further etremity of the vast station, an engine appeared,
slowly dragging its burden of carriages and came sighing like a weary
giant up the side of the platform.  The passengers in the front
compartments leapt out and began filing towards the eit.

"ow for it," muttered obmore.  "eep back, you two  y menll watch
him--and whoevers here to meet him, for hes epecting somebody."

othing happened for the first minute.  The crowd of discharged
passengers, men and women, civilians, soldiers, sailors, filed out and
went their ways.  radually it thinned.  Then Hetherwicks arm was
suddenly gripped by hona for the second time, and he saw that she was
staring at something beyond the barrier.

"There" she eclaimed.  "There--the man in the grey coat and fawn hat
Thats the man who drove the car  ee  aseverie sees him"

Hetherwick looked and saw aseverie lift a hand in recognition of a
young, fresh-faced man, who was nearing the ticket-collectors, and who
carried in his right hand a small, suare parcel.  ut he saw more.
lose behind this young man came atherfield on one hand and uigman on
the other.  They drew closer as he neared the gate, and on its other
side the detectives drew closer to aseverie.

"ow then," whispered obmore, and stole swiftly forward.

It was all over so swiftly that neither Hetherwick nor hona knew
eactly how the thing was done.  efore they had realised that the men
were trapped, or the gaping bystanders had realised that something was
happening under their very noses, aseverie and his man were two safely
handcuffed prisoners in the midst of a little group of silent men who
were hurrying both away.  Within a moment captors and captives were
lost in the outer reaches of the station.  Then the two watchers
suddenly realised that atherfield, holding the suare parcel in his
hand, was standing close by, a grim but highly satisfied smile in his
eyes.  He held the parcel up before them.

"ery neat, r. Hetherwick, very neat indeed" he said.  "ncommonly
neat--eh?"

ut Hetherwick knew that he was not referring to the parcel.




HAT II

TH AA

hona went back to her old uarters at the little hotel in urrey
treet for that night, and net morning Hetherwick came round to her,
with an armful of newspapers.  inding her alone, he laid them on the
table at her side with a significant nod of his head at certain big
black letters which topped the uppermost columns.

"atherfield must have given plenty of informing news to the pressmen
last night," he remarked with a grim smile.  "Its all in there--his
own adventures at outhampton yesterday mine and obmores in
Westminster, and all the rest of it.  I believe the newspaper people
call this sort of thing a story--and a fine story it makes  Winding
up, of course, with the dramatic arrest of aseverie at Waterloo  Im
afraid were in for publicity for a time, worse luck"

"hall we--shall I--have to appear at that mans trial?" asked hona.

"Thats unavoidable, Im afraid, and at other things before that,"
answered Hetherwick.  "Therell be the proceedings before the
magistrate, and the adjourned inuest, and so on.  ant be helped and
therell be some satisfaction in knowing that were ridding the world
of a peculiarly cruel and cold-blooded murderer  That chap aseverie
is certainly as consummate a villain as I ever heard of.  A human
spider--and clever in his web-spinning.  ut I wish one had a few more
particulars on one point--and yet I dont see how ones to get them."

"What point?" asked hona.

"That sealed packet, containing the details, or formula, or whatever it
is, of your grandfathers invention," replied Hetherwick.  "Where is
it?  What, precisely, is it?  id Ambrose get it from him?  Has
aseverie got it?  o far as I can make out, the whole thing began with
that.  Whether it was really worth a farthing or a fortune, your
grandfather brought to ondon something which he honestly believed to
be of great value, and theres no doubt that he got into the hands of
those two men, Ambrose and aseverie, because of it.  Theres no doubt,
either, that in conversation with them, he told them, perhaps jokingly,
what he knew about adame istorelle.  or is there any doubt that
these two murdered him.  or is there any doubt, in my mind, as to
how they murdered him  ou must remember that both men were trained
medical men, and, obviously of a scientific turn of mind into the
bargain.  ach had doubtless made a deep study of poisons.  uch a
knowledge is of value to such men as they were--men of criminal
tendencies.  robably they knew of a subtle poison easily administered,
the effects of which would not be evident for some hours.  o doubt
they timed their work, so that their victim should die swiftly and
suddenly when well away from their laboratory.  And, of course, they
did the same thing in the case of ranett.  ranett paid the penalty of
being with your grandfather.  ut for what did they murder your
grandfather?  id they get rid of him so that they could keep his
secret about adame istorelle to themselves, and blackmail her and her
sister, or that they could rob him of his invention and turn it to
their own profit?  If the latter, then----"

He paused, looking inuiringly at hona, as if he epected her to see
what he was after.  ut hona shook her head.

"I dont follow," she said.  "What then?"

"This," replied Hetherwick.  "If their desire to get hold of your
grandfathers secret was their motive, then that secrets worth a lot
of money  oney which ought to come to you.  ont you see?  Where is
the secret?  Wheres the sealed packet?  I suppose the police would
search aseverie last night--perhaps they found it on him.  We shall
hear--but, anyway its yours."

hona made a gesture of aversion.

"I should hate to touch or have anything to do with it if it had been
in that mans possession" she said.  "ut I dont think theres any
doubt that they murdered my grandfather because of that secret.  Only,
I think, too, theyd a double motive.  The secret about adame
istorelle was their second string.  robably they believed that ady
iversreade would be an easy prey.  And I think she would have been, if
she hadnt had ajor enteney to fall back on.  I know she was
dreadfully upset after aseveries first visit.  o I put it this
way--always have done they thought they could sell grandfathers
invention for a lot of money, and get another lot out of ady
iversreade and adame istorelle as blackmail."

"lack money, indeed, all of it" eclaimed Hetherwick.  "Well----"

A woman-servant put her head into the little parlour in which they were
sitting, and looked significantly at hona.

"Theres a policeman downstairs, miss, asking for you," she announced.
"eastways, he wants to know if you can tell him if r. Hetherwicks
here or been here."

Hetherwick went to the head of the stair a policeman standing in the
hall below looked up and touched his helmet.

"Inspector atherfields compliments, sir, and could you step round and
bring iss Hannaford with you?" he asked.  "Theres new developments,
r. Hetherwick.  Important"

"Well come at once," assented Hetherwick.  "Ten minutes"  He went
back and hurried hona away.  "What now?" he asked as they hastened
towards atherfields office.  "erhaps theyve etracted something out
of aseverie?  Or possibly the newspapers have attracted the attention
of somebody who can give further news?"

The last suggestion strengthened itself when, on entering atherfields
room, they found him closeted with two strangers whose appearance was
that of responsible and well-to-do commercial men.  All three were
discovered in what looked like a serious and deep conversation, and
Hetherwick was uick to notice that the two unknown men looked at hona
with unusual interest.  atherfield made haste to introduce her as the
late e-uperintendent Hannafords granddaughter, and Hetherwick as a
gentleman who had been much concerned in the recent proceedings.

"These gentlemen, iss Hannaford and r. Hetherwick," he proceeded,
waving his hand at the others, "are essrs. ulthwaite and Houseover,
manufacturing chemists, of ast Ham--incidentally, theyve also a big
place in ancashire.  And having seen this mornings papers, in which,
as youve no doubt noticed, theres a good deal about our affair,
theyve come straight to me with some news which will prove uncommonly
useful when aseveries put in the dock before the magistrate this
afternoon.  The fact is, r. Hetherwick, these gentlemen have supplied
a missing link"

"What link?" asked Hetherwick eagerly.

atherfield nodded at the elder of the two men, ulthwaite, who
produced a pocket-book, and etracted from it a sheet of paper.
ilently, he passed it over to atherfield, who turned to hona.

"ow, iss Hannaford," he said, with a note of triumph in his voice, "I
dare say you can positively identify your grandfathers handwriting and
his way of making figures?  an you swear that this has been written by
him?"

hona gave but one glance at the paper before looking up with a glance
of positive assertion.

"Oh, yes" she eclaimed.  "That is his writing, without a doubt
othing could be more certain"

atherfield turned to Hetherwick.

"Thats the formula for the ink" he said.  "ow weve got the big
thing we wanted  And r. ulthwaite will tell you how he got it."

ulthwaite, after allowing Hetherwick to look at the paper, carefully
replaced it in his pocket-book.  There was an air of aniety about him
and about his partner concerning which Hetherwick began to make
guesses--they looked as if they were uncertain and uneasy.  ut
ulthwaite was ready enough to tell his story.

"We got it in this way," he said.  "And I may as well say, as Ive
already said to you, r. atherfield, that I dont think we should have
got it at all if you police people hadnt been so reticent on that one
particular point--if youd noised it abroad about Hannafords secret we
might have been forewarned.  However, some little time ago, a man whom
we knew as asing, and whom I firmly believe to be the aseverie that
weve read about in the papers this morning--a man, mind you, that wed
done business with now and then during the last year or so--came to us
and offered us the formula for a new black ink which he asserted would
drive every known ink off the market, all over the world  He made
etravagant claims for it he swore it was the first absolutely perfect
writing fluid ever invented.  He brought a sample of it which hed made
up himself--he put it to various tests.  ut he did more--he offered us
the use of the secret formula so that we ourselves could make and test
it before deciding whether wed fall in with his suggestion, which was
that we should offer him a lump cash sum for the formula.  Well, we did
make the ink, from the formula, and we did test it, and there is no
doubt about it--it is all, and perhaps more, that asing, or aseverie
claimed for its ecellence.  I neednt go into the drawbacks attaching
to most well-known inks--this has none of them.  And when asing came
back to us, a few days ago, we decided to buy the formula from him.  We
agreed upon a cash price, and day before yesterday we paid the amount
over--at our office in ast Ham."

"es?" said Hetherwick uietly.  "And--what was the price agreed upon?"

The two partners echanged a glance it seemed to hona, who was
watching them intently, that they looked more uneasy than before.  ut
ulthwaite replied with promptitude.

"Ten thousand pounds"

"How did you pay him?" asked Hetherwick.  "In cash?"

"o--by open cheue, at his own reuest.  That, of course, was as good
as cash.  ut," continued ulthwaite, "as soon as we read the
newspapers this morning, we--that is, I, for I read the whole thing on
my way to business--went at once to our bank to see if the cheue had
been cashed.  It had--an hour or two after wed handed it to asing.
Hed taken the amount in ank of ngland notes."

Hetherwick looked at atherfield.

"Of course," he remarked, as if he were asking a uestion, "that
formula belongs to iss Hannaford?  aseverie had no right to sell
it--he stole it?"

"Thats the fact, r. Hetherwick," assented atherfield.  "These
gentlemen, innocently enough, bought stolen property.  ut Ive just
told them something that Ill now tell you.  We found the
money--notes--on aseverie, last night.  Intact--in his pocket-book.
Of course, with that, and the jewels which his accomplice succeeded in
getting at outhampton, hed got a nice haul.  ut now we can easily
prove how he came by that ten thousand--and itll go back to essrs.
ulthwaite and Houseover there.  We can prove, too, from their
evidence, that aseverie poisoned r. Hannaford for the sake of that
formula.  aseveries done"

"These gentlemen will recover their ten thousand pounds, then?" said
Hetherwick.  "In that case"--he turned to the two partners--"I dont
see that youve anything to worry about?" he suggested.  "The formula,
of course, must be handed over to----"

"Well, now, thats just it, r. Hetherwick," interrupted the partner
who until then had kept silent.  "The fact is, sir, we dont want to
lose that formula  We gave this man aring or aseverie ten thousand
pounds for it, but----"

"ut you really believe it to be worth more, eh?" said Hetherwick with
a smile.  "I see  Then in that case----"

"If we get back our ten thousand, sir, we shall be pleased to treat
with the rightful owner," said ulthwaite, after an echange of looks
with his partner.  "In the meantime, the formula is safe and secret
with us.  We are well-known people----"

"Well leave it at that, just now," answered Hetherwick.  "iss
Hannaford will trust you to keep your word about safety and secrecy.
And later--business"  He got up, and hona rose with him.  "hall you
want us to-day, atherfield?" he asked.  "If not----"

"o" replied atherfield.  "erely formal business to-day--then, this
afternoon, hell be brought up.  Only evidence of arrest and
application for adjournment.  ou can go away, r. Hetherwick--well
let you both know when youre wanted."

Hetherwick led hona out, and once clear of the police precincts, smote
his stick on the pavement.

"When were through with this business Im hanged if I ever dabble in
crime affairs again, personally" he eclaimed.  "aseverie has been a
pretty vile eample to tackle  And that you should be dragged into it,
too" he added, suddenly.  "That upset me more than anything.  However,
its getting to an end, and then----"

He paused, while she looked up at him with a little wonder at his
vehemence.  Then, and as they were at that moment walking along a uiet
stretch of the less freuented side of the mbankment, she timidly laid
a hand on his arm.  He turned sharply, laying his hand on hers.

"I think youve been very considerate and thoughtful for me," she said.
"After all--it wasnt uite mere interest in crime that made you----"

"ood ord, no" he eclaimed uickly.  "At first, perhaps, half
that--half you  I felt--somehow--that Id got to look after you.  And
then--and when you disappeared--but I believe Im a bit muddle-headed
Ill tell you something--all that time you were lost, I--well, I
scarcely ever slept  Wondering, you know.  And when you turned up
yesterday afternoon--but I want to ask you something that Im not uite
clear about--I was certainly muddled just then"

"What is it?" she asked.

Hetherwick bent down to her and dropped his voice.

"I was so glad, so relieved to see you, yesterday afternoon," he said,
"that--that I felt daed--eh?  And I want to know--did I kiss you?"

hona suddenly looked up at him--and laughed.

"Oh, really, how amusing you are" she said.  "Why, of course, you did
Twice"

"Thats good" he eclaimed.  "I--I thought perhaps Id dreamt it.
ut--did you kiss me?"

"o you really want to be dead sure?" asked hona mischievously.  "ery
well--I did"

"Thats better" said Hetherwick.




TH 









nd of roject utenbergs The haring ross ystery, by . . letcher

  O THI OT T OO TH HAI O T 

 This file should be named -.tt or -.ip 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in
        httpwww.gutenberg.org

roduced by Al Haines
pdated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

reating the works from print editions not protected by .. copyright
law means that no one owns a nited tates copyright in these works,
so the oundation and you can copy and distribute it in the nited
tates without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. pecial rules, set forth in the eneral Terms of se part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing roject
utenberg-tm electronic works to protect the OT T-tm
concept and trademark. roject utenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eook, complying with the rules is very easy. ou may use this eook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ATHI in the nited tates with eooks
not protected by .. copyright law. edistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

TAT  I

TH  OT T I
A A THI O O ITIT O  THI WO

To protect the roject utenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "roject
utenberg", you agree to comply with all the terms of the ull
roject utenberg-tm icense available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.orglicense.

ection . eneral Terms of se and edistributing roject
utenberg-tm electronic works

.A. y reading or using any part of this roject utenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
trademarkcopyright agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of roject utenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
roject utenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
...

.. "roject utenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most roject utenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. ee
paragraph . below. There are a lot of things you can do with roject
utenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to roject utenberg-tm
electronic works. ee paragraph . below.

.. The roject utenberg iterary Archive oundation "the
oundation" or A, owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of roject utenberg-tm electronic works. early all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the nited
tates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
nited tates and you are located in the nited tates, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to roject utenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the roject utenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing roject utenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
roject utenberg-tm name associated with the work. ou can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full roject utenberg-tm icense when
you share it without charge with others.

.. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. opyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the nited tates,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other roject utenberg-tm work. The oundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the nited tates.

.. nless you have removed all references to roject utenberg

... The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full roject utenberg-tm icense must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a roject utenberg-tm work any work
on which the phrase "roject utenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "roject utenberg" is associated is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed

  This eook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited tates and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. ou may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the roject utenberg icense included with this
  eook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  nited tates, youll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

... If an individual roject utenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from tets not protected by .. copyright law does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder, the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the nited tates without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "roject
utenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the reuirements of paragraphs .. through .. or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the roject utenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs .. or ...

... If an individual roject utenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .. through .. and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the roject utenberg-tm icense for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

... o not unlink or detach or remove the full roject utenberg-tm
icense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with roject utenberg-tm.

... o not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the roject
utenberg-tm icense.

... ou may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertet form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a roject utenberg-tm work in a format
other than "lain anilla AII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official roject utenberg-tm web site
www.gutenberg.org, you must, at no additional cost, fee or epense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of eporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon reuest, of the work in its original "lain
anilla AII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full roject utenberg-tm icense as specified in paragraph ...

... o not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any roject utenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .. or ...

... ou may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing roject utenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

 ou pay a royalty fee of  of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of roject utenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the roject utenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the roject
  utenberg iterary Archive oundation. oyalty payments must be paid
  within  days following each date on which you prepare or are
  legally reuired to prepare your periodic ta returns. oyalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the roject
  utenberg iterary Archive oundation at the address specified in
  ection , "Information about donations to the roject utenberg
  iterary Archive oundation."

 ou provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing or by e-mail within  days of receipt that she
  does not agree to the terms of the full roject utenberg-tm
  icense. ou must reuire such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of roject utenberg-tm
  works.

 ou provide, in accordance with paragraph .., a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days of
  receipt of the work.

 ou comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of roject utenberg-tm works.

... If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a roject
utenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the roject utenberg iterary Archive oundation and The
roject utenberg Trademark , the owner of the roject utenberg-tm
trademark. ontact the oundation as set forth in ection  below.

..

... roject utenberg volunteers and employees epend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by .. copyright law in creating the roject
utenberg-tm collection. espite these efforts, roject utenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "efects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your euipment.

... IIT WAAT, IAI O AA - cept for the "ight
of eplacement or efund" described in paragraph .., the roject
utenberg iterary Archive oundation, the owner of the roject
utenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a roject
utenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and epenses, including legal
fees. O A THAT O HA O I O I, TIT
IAIIT, AH O WAAT O AH O OTAT T THO
OI I AAAH ... O A THAT TH OATIO, TH
TAA OW, A A ITITO  THI AT WI OT 
IA TO O O ATA, IT, IIT, OTIA, ITI O
IITA AA  I O I OTI O TH OIIIT O H
AA.

... IIT IHT O AT O  - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money if any you paid for it by sending a
written eplanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written eplanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fi the problem.

... cept for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .., this work is provided to you A-I, WITH O
OTH WAATI O A I,  O II, II T OT
IIT TO WAATI O HATAIIT O IT O A O.

... ome states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the eclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maimum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

... IIT - ou agree to indemnify and hold the oundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the oundation, anyone
providing copies of roject utenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of roject utenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and epenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur a distribution of this
or any roject utenberg-tm work, b alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any roject utenberg-tm work, and c any
efect you cause.

ection . Information about the ission of roject utenberg-tm

roject utenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
eists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

olunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching roject utenberg-tms
goals and ensuring that the roject utenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In , the roject
utenberg iterary Archive oundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for roject utenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the roject utenberg iterary
Archive oundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
ections  and  and the oundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



ection . Information about the roject utenberg iterary Archive oundation

The roject utenberg iterary Archive oundation is a non profit
c educational corporation organied under the laws of the
state of ississippi and granted ta eempt status by the Internal
evenue ervice. The oundations I or federal ta identification
number is -. ontributions to the roject utenberg iterary
Archive oundation are ta deductible to the full etent permitted by
.. federal laws and your states laws.

The oundations principal office is in airbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address O o , airbanks, A , but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at  orth  West, alt
ake ity, T ,  -. mail contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the oundations web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.orgcontact

or additional contact information

    r. regory . ewby
    hief ecutive and irector
    gbnewbypglaf.org

ection . Information about onations to the roject utenberg
iterary Archive oundation

roject utenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of euipment including outdated euipment. any small donations
 to , are particularly important to maintaining ta eempt
status with the I.

The oundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all  states of the nited
tates. ompliance reuirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these reuirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To 
OATIO or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation reuirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning ta treatment of donations received from
outside the nited tates. .. laws alone swamp our small staff.

lease check the roject utenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. onations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate

ection . eneral Information About roject utenberg-tm electronic works.

rofessor ichael . Hart was the originator of the roject
utenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. or forty years, he produced and
distributed roject utenberg-tm eooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

roject utenberg-tm eooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the .. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

ost people start at our Web site which has the main  search
facility www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about roject utenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the roject utenberg iterary
Archive oundation, how to help produce our new eooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eooks.

