The roect Gutenberg Book of mpire, by Clifford onald Simak

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  ou may copy it, give it away or
reuse it under the terms of the roect Gutenberg icense included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title mpire

Author Clifford onald Simak

Release ate February ,  Book 

anguage nglish


 START F TIS RCT GTNBRG B MIR 




roduced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the nline
istributed roofreading Team at httpwww.pgdp.net









                 MIR

 A owerful Novel of Intrigue and Action
      in the NotSoistant Future

                  by

            CIFFR . SIMA


  A Complete RIGINA Book, NABRIG


          WR ITINS, INC.
           WST T STRT
          NW R , NW R




   Copyright 
         by
  WR ITINS, INC.


 RINT IN T .S.A.




Transcribers Note

    tensive research did not uncover any evidence that the .S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.




CATR N


Spencer Chambers frowned at the spacegram on the desk before him. ohn
Moore Mallory. That was the man who had caused so much trouble in the
ovian elections. The troublemaker who had shouted for an investigation
of Interplanetary ower. The man who had said that Spencer Chambers and
Interplanetary ower were waging economic war against the people of the
Solar System.

Chambers smiled. With long, wellkept fingers, he rubbed his irongray
mustache.

ohn Moore Mallory was right for that reason, he was a dangerous man.
rison was the place for him, but probably a prison outside the ovian
confederacy. erhaps one of the prison ships that plied to the edge of
the System, clear to the orbit of luto. r would the prison on Mercury
be better?

Spencer Chambers leaned back in his chair and matched his fingertips,
staring at them, frowning again.

Mercury was a hard place. A mans life wasnt worth much there. Working
in the power plants, where the Sun poured out its flaming blast of heat,
and radiations sucked the energy from ones body, in si months, a year
at most, any man was finished.

Chambers shook his head. Not Mercury. e had nothing against Mallory. e
had never met the man but he rather liked him. Mallory was ust a man
fighting for a principle, the same as Chambers was doing.

e was sorry that it had been necessary to put Mallory in prison. If the
man only had listened to reason, had accepted the proposals that had
been made, or ust had dropped out of sight until the ovian elections
were over ... or at least had moderated his charges. But when he had
attempted to reveal the offers, which he termed bribery, something had
to be done.

udwig Stutsman had handled that part of it. Brilliant fellow, this
Stutsman, but as mean a human as ever walked on two legs. A man utterly
without mercy, entirely without principle. A man who would stoop to any
depth. But a useful man, a good one to have around to do the dirty work.
And dirty work sometimes was necessary.

Chambers picked up the spacegram again and studied it. Stutsman, out on
Callisto now, had sent it. e was doing a good ob out there. The ovian
confederacy, less than one arth year under Interplanetary domination,
was still half rebellious, still angry at being forced to turn over its
government to the handpicked officials of Chambers company. An iron
heel was needed and Stutsman was that iron heel.

                                   

So the people on the ovian satellites wanted the release of ohn Moore
Mallory. Theyre getting ugly, the spacegram said. It had been a
mistake to confine Mallory to Callisto. Stutsman should have thought of
that.

Chambers would instruct Stutsman to remove Mallory from the Callisto
prison, place him on one of the prison ships. Give instructions to the
captain to make things comfortable for him. When this furor had blown
over, after things had uieted down in the ovian confederacy, it might
be possible to release Mallory. After all, the man wasnt really guilty
of any crime. It was a shame that he should be imprisoned when
racketeering rats like Scorio went scotfree right here in New ork.

A buzzer purred softly and Chambers reached out to press a stud.

r. Craven to see you, his secretary said. ou asked to see him, Mr.
Chambers.

All right, said Chambers. Send him right in.

e clicked the stud again, picked up his pen, wrote out a spacegram to
Stutsman, and signed it.

r. erbert Craven stood ust inside the door, his black suit wrinkled
and untidy, his sparse sandy hair standing on end.

ou sent for me, he said sourly.

Sit down, octor, invited Chambers.

                                   

Craven sat down. e peered at Chambers through thicklensed glasses.

I havent much time, he declared acidly.

Cigar? Chambers offered.

Never smoke.

A drink, then?

ou know I dont drink, snapped Craven.

octor, said Chambers, youre the least sociable man Ive ever known.
What do you do to enoy yourself?

I work, said Craven. I find it interesting.

ou must. ou even begrudge the time it takes to talk with me.

I wont deny it. What do you want this time?

Chambers swung about to face him suarely across the desk. There was a
cold look in the financiers gray eyes and his lips were grim.

Craven, he said, I dont trust you. Ive never trusted you. robably
thats no news to you.

ou dont trust anyone, countered Craven. oure watching everybody
all the time.

ou sold me a gadget I didnt need five years ago, said Chambers. ou
outfoed me and I dont hold it against you. In fact, it almost made me
admire you. Because of that I put you under a contract, one that you and
all the lawyers in hell cant break, because someday youll find
something valuable, and when you do, I want it. A million a year is a
high price to pay to protect myself against you, but I think its worth
it. If I didnt think so, Id have turned you over to Stutsman long ago.
Stutsman knows how to handle men like you.

ou mean, said Craven, that youve found Im working on something I
havent reported to you.

Thats eactly it.

oull get a report when I have something to report. Not before.

Thats all right, said Chambers. I ust wanted you to know.

Craven got to his feet slowly. These talks with you are so refreshing,
he remarked.

Well have to have them oftener, said Chambers.

Craven banged the door as he went out.

Chambers stared after him. A ueer man, the most astute scientific mind
anywhere, but not a man to be trusted.

                                   

The president of Interplanetary ower rose from his chair and walked to
the window. Below spread the roaring inferno of New ork, greatest city
in the Solar System, a strange place of ueer beauty and weighty
materialism, dreamlike in its superskyscraper construction, but
utilitarian in its purpose, for it was a port of many planets.

The afternoon sunlight slanted through the window, softening the
irongray hair of the man who stood there. is shoulders almost blocked
the window, for he had the body of a fighting man, one, moreover, in
good condition. is shortclipped mustache rode with an air of dignity
above his thin, rugged mouth.

is eyes looked out on the city, but did not see it. Through his brain
went the vision of a dream that was coming true. is dream spun its
fragile net about the planets of the Solar System, about their moons,
about every single foot of planetary ground where men had gone to build
and create a second homelandthe mines of Mercury and the farms of
enus, the pleasurelands of Mars and the mighty domed cities on the
moons of upiter, the moons of Saturn and the great, cold laboratories
of luto.

ower was the key, supplied by the accumulators owned and rented by
Interplanetary ower. A monopoly of power. ower that enus and Mercury
had too much of, must sell on the market, and that the other planets and
satellites needed. ower to drive huge spaceships across the void, to
turn the wheels of industry, to heat the domes on colder worlds. ower
to make possible the life and functioning of mankind on hostile worlds.

In the great power plants of Mercury and enus, the accumulators were
charged and then shipped out to those other worlds where power was
needed. Accumulators were rented, never sold. Because they belonged at
all times to Interplanetary ower, they literally held the fate of all
the planets in their cells.

A few accumulators were manufactured and sold by other smaller
companies, but they were few and the price was high. Interplanetary saw
to that. When the cry of monopoly was raised, Interplanetary could point
to these other manufacturers as proof that there was no restraint of
trade. nder the statute no monopoly could be charged, but the cost of
manufacturing accumulators alone was protection against serious
competition from anyone.

pon a satisfactory, efficient powerstorage device rested the success
or failure of space travel itself. That device and the power it stored
were for sale by Interplanetary ... and, to all practical purposes, by
Interplanetary only.

Accordingly, year after year, Interplanetary had tightened its grip upon
the Solar System. Mercury was virtually owned by the company. Mars and
enus were little more than puppet states. And now the government of the
ovian confederacy was in the hands of men who acknowledged Spencer
Chambers as their master. n arth the agents and the lobbyists
representing Interplanetary swarmed in every capital, even in the
capital of the Central uropean Federation, whose people were dominated
by an absolute dictatorship. For even Central urope needed
accumulators.

conomic dictatorship, said Spencer Chambers to himself. Thats what
ohn Moore Mallory called it. Well, why not? Such a dictatorship would
insure the best business brains at the heads of the governments, would
give the Solar System a business administration, would guard against the
mistakes of popular government.

emocracies were based on a false presumptionthe theory that all
people were fit to rule. It granted intelligence where there was no
intelligence. It presumed ability where there was not the slightest
trace of any. It gave the idiot the same political standing as the wise
man, the crackpot the same political opportunity as the man of
wellgrounded common sense, the weakling the same voice as the strong
man. It was government by emotion rather than by udgment.

                                   

Spencer Chambers face took on stern lines. There was no softness left
now. The late afternoon sunlight painted angles and threw shadows and
created highlights that made him look almost like a granite mask on a
solid granite body.

There was no room for Mallorys nonsense in a dynamic, epanding
civilization. No reason to kill himeven he might have value under
certain circumstances, and no really efficient eecutive destroys
valuebut he had to be out of the way where his mobrousing tongue
could do no damage. The damned fool What good would his idiotic
idealism do him on a prison spaceship?




CATR TW


Russell age suinted thoughtful eyes at the thing he had createda
transparent cloud, a visible, sharply outlined cloud of something. It
was visible as a piece of glass is visible, as a globe of water is
visible. There it lay, within his apparatus, a thing that shouldnt be.

I believe we have something there, arry, he said slowly.

arry Wilson sucked at the cigarette that drooped from the corner of his
mouth, blew twin streams of smoke from his nostrils. is eyes twitched
nervously.

eah, he said. Antientropy.

All of that, said Russell age. erhaps a whole lot more.

It stops all energy change, said Wilson, as if time stood still and
things remained eactly as they were when time had stopped.

Its more than that, age declared. It conserves not only energy in
toto, not only the energy of the whole, but the energy of the part. It
is perfectly transparent, yet it has refractive ualities. It wont
absorb light because to do so would change its energy content. In that
field, whatever is hot stays hot, whatever is cold cant gain heat.

e scraped his hand over a weeks growth of beard, considering. From his
pocket he took a pipe and a leather pouch. Thoughtfully he filled the
pipe and lit it.

It had started with his eperiments in Force Field , an eperiment to
observe the effects of heating a conductor in that field. It had been
impossible to heat the conductor electrically, for that would have upset
the field, changed it, twisted it into something else. So he had used a
Bunsen burner.

Through halfclosed eyes, he still could see that slender strand of
imperm wire, how its silvery length had turned to red under the blue
flame. eep red at first and then brighter until it flamed in almost
whitehot incandescence. And all the while the humming of the
transformer as the force field built up. The humming of the transformer
and the muted roaring of the burner and the glowing heat in the length
of wire.

Something had happened then ... an awesome something. A weird wrench as
if some greater power, some greater law had taken hold. A glove of
force, invisible, but somehow sensed, had closed about the wire and
flame. Instantly the roaring of the burner changed in tone an odor of
gas spewed out of the vents at its base. Something had cut off the flow
of flame in the brass tube. Some force, something ...

The flame was a transparent cloud. The blue and red of flame and hot
wire had changed, in the whiplash of a second, to a refractive but
transparent cloud that hung there within the apparatus.

                                   

The red color had vanished from the wire as the blue had vanished from
the flame. The wire was shining. It wasnt silvery it wasnt white.
There was no hint of color, ust a refractive blur that told him the
wire was there. Colorless reflection. And that meant perfect
reflection The most perfect reflectors reflect little more than  per
cent of the light incident and the absorption of the two per cent colors
those reflectors as copper or gold or chromium. But the imperm wire
within that force field that had been flame a moment before, was
reflecting all light.

e had cut the wire with a pair of shears and it had still hung,
unsupported, in the air, unchanging within the shimmer that constituted
something no man had ever seen before.

ou cant put energy in, said age, talking to himself, chewing the
bit of his pipe. ou cant take energy out. Its still as hot as it
was at the moment the change came. But it cant radiate any of that
heat. It cant radiate any kind of energy.

Why, even the wire was reflective, so that it couldnt absorb energy and
thus disturb the balance that eisted within that bit of space. Not only
energy itself was preserved, but the very form of energy.

But why? That was the uestion that hammered at him. Why? Before he
could go ahead, he had to know why.

erhaps the verging of the field toward Field ? Somewhere in between
those two fields of force, somewhere within that almost noneistent
borderline which separated them, he might find the secret.

Rising to his feet, he knocked out his pipe.

arry, he announced, we have work to do.

Smoke drooled from Wilsons nostrils.

eah, he said.

age had a sudden urge to lash out and hit the man. That eternal
drooling of smoke out of his nostrils, that everlasting cigarette
dangling limply from one corner of his mouth, the shifty eyes, the dirty
fingernails, got on his nerves.

But Wilson was a mechanical genius. is hands were clever despite the
dirty nails. They could fashion pinhead cameras and threegram
electroscopes or balances capable of measuring the pressure of
electronic impacts. As a laboratory assistant he was unbeatable. If only
he wouldnt answer every statement or uestion with that nerveracking
yeah

age stopped in front of a smaller room, enclosed by heavy uartz.
Inside that room was the great bank of mercuryvapor rectifiers. From
them lashed a bluegreen glare that splashed against his face and
shoulders, painting him in angry, garish color. The glass guarded him
from the terrific blast of ultraviolet light that flared from the pool
of shimmering molten metal, a terrible emanation that would have flayed
a mans skin from his body within the space of seconds.

                                   

The scientist suinted his eyes against the glare. There was something
in it that caught him with a deadly fascination. The personification of
powerthe incredibly intense spot of incandescent vapor, the tiny
sphere of bluegreen fire, the spinning surge of that shining pool, the
intense glare of ionization.

ower ... the breath of modern mankind, the pulse of progress.

In an adacent room were the accumulators. Not Interplanetary
accumulators, which he would have had to rent, but ones he had bought
from a small manufacturer who turned out only ten or fifteen thousand a
year ... not enough to bother Interplanetary.

Gregory Manning had made it possible for him to buy those accumulators.
Manning had made many things possible in this little laboratory hidden
deep within the heart of the Sierras, many miles from any other
habitation.

Mannings grandfather, ackson Manning, had first generated the
curvature field and overcome gravity, had left his grandson a fortune
that approached the fivebillion mark. But that had not been all. From
his famous ancestor, Manning had inherited a keen, sharp, scientific
mind. From his mothers father, Anthony Barret, he had gained an astute
business sense. But unlike his maternal grandfather, he had not turned
his attention entirely to business. ld Man Barret had virtually ruled
Wall Street for almost a generation, had become a financial myth linked
with keen business sense, with an uncanny ability to handle men and
money. But his grandson, Gregory Manning, had become known to the world
in a different way. For while he had inherited scientific ability from
one side of the family, financial sense from the other, he likewise had
inherited from some other ancestorperhaps remote and unknowna
wanderlust that had taken him to the farthest outposts of the Solar
System.

                                   

It was Gregory Manning who had financed and headed the rescue epedition
which took the first luto flight off that dark icebo of a world when
the eploration ship had crashed. It was he who had piloted home the
winning ship in the upiter derby, sending his bulleting craft screaming
around the mighty planet in a time which set a Solar record. It was
Gregory Manning who had entered the enusian swamps and brought back,
alive, the mystery lizard that had been reported there. And he was the
one who had flown the serum to Mercury when the lives of ten thousand
men depended upon the thrumming engines that drove the shining ship
inward toward the Sun.

Russell age had known him since college days. They had worked out their
eperiments together in the school laboratories, had spent long hours
arguing and wondering ... debating scientific theories. Both had loved
the same girl, both had lost her, and together they had been bitter over
it ... drowning their bitterness in a threeday drunk that made campus
history.

After graduation Gregory Manning had gone on to world fame, had roamed
over the face of every planet ecept upiter and Saturn, had visited
every inhabited moon, had climbed unar mountains, penetrated enusian
swamps, crossed Martian deserts, driven by a need to see and eperience
that would not let him rest. Russell age had sunk into obscurity, had
buried himself in scientific research, coming more and more to aim his
effort at the discovery of a new source of power ... power that would be
cheap, that would destroy the threat of Interplanetary dictatorship.

age turned away from the rectifier room.

Maybe Ill have something to show Greg soon, he told himself. Maybe,
after all these years....

                                   

Forty minutes after age put through the call to Chicago, Gregory
Manning arrived. The scientist, watching for him from the tiny lawn that
surrounded the combined home and laboratory, saw his plane bullet into
sight, scream down toward the little field and make a perfect landing.

urrying toward the plane as Gregory stepped out of it, Russell noted
that his friend looked the same as ever, though it had been a year or
more since he had seen him. The thing that was discomfiting about Greg
was his apparently enduring youthfulness.

e was clad in odhpurs and boots and an old tweed coat, with a
brilliant blue stock at his throat. e waved a hand in greeting and
hurried forward. Russ heard the grating of his boots across the gravel
of the walk.

Gregs face was bleak it always was. A clean, smooth face, hard, with
something stern about the eyes.

is grip almost crushed Russs hand, but his tone was crisp. ou
sounded ecited, Russ.

I have a right to be, said the scientist. I think I have found
something at last.

Atomic power? asked Manning. There was no flutter of ecitement in his
voice, ust a little hardening of the lines about his eyes, a little
tensing of the muscles in his cheeks.

Russ shook his head. Not atomic energy. If its anything, its material
energy, the secret of the energy of matter.

They halted before two lawn chairs.

ets sit down here, invited Russ. I can tell it to you out here,
show it to you afterward. It isnt often I can be outdoors.

It is a fine place, said Greg. I can smell the pines.

The laboratory perched on a ledge of rugged rock, nearly , feet
above sea level. Before them the land swept down in agged ruggedness
to a valley far below, where a stream flashed in the noonday sun. Beyond
climbed pineclad slopes and far in the distance gleamed shimmering
spires of snowcapped peaks.

From his leather acket Russ hauled forth his pipe and tobacco, lighted
up.

It was this way, he said. eaning back comfortably he outlined the
first eperiment. Manning listened intently.

Now comes the funny part, Russ added. I had hopes before, but I
believe this is what put me on the right track. I took a metal rod, a
welding rod, you know. I pushed it into that solidified force field, if
that is what youd call it ... although that doesnt describe it. The
rod went in. Took a lot of pushing, but it went in. And though the field
seemed entirely transparent, you couldnt see the rod, even after I had
pushed enough of it in so it should have come out the other side. It was
as if it hadnt entered the sphere of force at all. As if I were ust
telescoping the rod and its density were increasing as I pushed, like
pushing it back into itself, but that, of course, wouldnt have been
possible.

e paused and puffed at his pipe, his eyes fied on the snowy peaks far
in the purple distance. Manning waited.

Finally the rod came out, Russ went on. Mind you, it came out, even
after I would have sworn, if I had relied alone upon my eyes, that it
hadnt entered the sphere at all. But it came out ninety degrees
removed from its point of entry

Wait a second, said Manning. This doesnt check. id you do it more
than once?

I did it a dozen times and the results were the same each time. But you
havent heard the half of it. When I pulled that rod outyes, I could
pull it outit was a good two inches shorter than when I had pushed it
in. I couldnt believe that part of it. It was even harder to believe
than that the rod should come out ninety degrees from its point of
entry. I measured the rods after that and made sure. ept an accurate
record. very single one of them lost approimately two inches by being
shoved into the sphere. very single one of them repeated the phenomenon
of curving within the sphere to come out somewhere else than where I had
inserted them.

                                   

Any eplanation of it? asked Manning, and now there was a cold chill
of ecitement in his voice.

Theories, no real eplanations. Remember that you cant see the rod
after you push it into the sphere. Its ust as if it isnt there.
Well, maybe it isnt. ou cant disturb anything within that sphere or
youd change the sum of potentialkineticpressure energies within it.
The sphere seems dedicated to that one thing ... it cannot change. If
the rod struck the imperm wire within the field, it would press the wire
down, would use up energy, decrease the potential energy. So the rod
simply had to miss it somehow. I believe it moved into some higher
plane of eistence and went around. And in doing that it had to turn so
many corners, so many fourthdimensional corners, that the length was
used up. r maybe it was increased in density. Im not sure. erhaps no
one will ever know.

Why didnt you tell me about this sooner? demanded Manning. I should
have been out here helping you. Maybe I wouldnt be much good, but I
might have helped.

oull have your chance, Russ told him. Were ust starting. I wanted
to be sure I had something before I troubled you. I tried other things
with that first sphere. I found that metal pushed through the sphere
will conduct an electrical current, which is pretty definite proof that
the metal isnt within the sphere at all. Glass can be forced through it
without breaking. Not fleible glass, but rods of plain old brittle
glass. It turns without breaking, and it also loses some of its length.
Water can be forced through a tube inserted in the sphere, but only when
terrific pressure is applied. What that proves I cant even begin to
guess.

ou said you eperimented on the first sphere, said Manning. ave you
made others?

Russ rose from his chair.

Come on in, Greg, he said, and there was a grin on his face. I have
something youll have to see to appreciate.

                                   

The apparatus was heavier and larger than the first in which Russ had
created the sphere of energy. Fed by a powerful accumulator battery,
five power leads were aimed at it, centered in the space between four
great copper blocks.

Russs hand went out to the switch that controlled the power. Suddenly
the power beams flamed, changed from a dull glow into an intense, almost
intolerable brilliance. A dull grumble of power climbed up to a steady
wail.

The beams had changed color, were bluish now, the typical color of
ionized air. They were ust power beams, meeting at a common center, but
somehow they were ueer, too, for though they were capable of slashing
far out into space, they were stopped dead. Their might was pouring into
a common center and going no farther. A splash of intensely glowing
light rested over them, then began to rotate slowly as a motor somewhere
hummed softly, cutting through the mad roar and rumble of power that
surged through the laboratory.

The glowing light was spinning more swiftly now. A rotating field was
being established. The power beams began to wink, falling and rising in
intensity. The sphere seemed to grow, almost filling the space between
the copper blocks. It touched one and rebounded slightly toward another.
It etended, increased slightly. A terrible screaming ripped through the
room, drowning out the titanic din as the spinning sphere came in
contact with the copper blocks, as force and metal resulted in weird
friction.

With a shocking wrench the beams went dead, the scream cut off, the roar
was gone. A terrifying silence fell upon the room as soon as the
suddenly thunking relays opened automatically.

                                   

The sphere was gone In its place was a tenuous refraction that told
where it had been. That and a thin layer of perfectly reflective
copper ... colorless now, but Manning knew it was copper, for it
represented the continuation of the great copper blocks.

is mind felt as if it were racing in neutral, getting nowhere. Within
that sphere was the total energy that had been poured out by five
gigantic beams, turned on full, for almost a minutes time. Compressed
energy nergy enough to blast these mountains down to the primal rock
were it released instantly. nergy trapped and held by virtue of some
peculiarity of that little borderline between Force Fields  and .

Russ walked across the room to a small electric truck with rubber
caterpillar treads, driven by a bank of portable accumulators.
Skillfully the scientist maneuvered it over to the other side of the
room, picked up a steel bar four inches in diameter and five feet long.
olding it by the handlers magnetic crane, he fied it firmly in the
armlike aws on the front of the machine, then moved the machine into a
position straddling the sphere of force.

With smashing momentum the iron aws thrust downward, driving the steel
bar into the sphere. There was a groaning crash as the handler came to a
halt, shuddering, with only eight inches of the bar buried in the
sphere. The stench of hot insulation filled the room while the electric
motor throbbed, the rubber treads creaked, the machine groaned and
strained, but the bar would go no farther.

Russ shut off the machine and stood back.

That gives you an idea, he said grimly.

The trick now, Greg said, is to break down the field.

Without a word, Russ reached for the power controls. A sudden roar of
thunderous fury and the beams leaped at the sphere ... but this time the
sphere did not materialize again. Again the wrench shuddered through the
laboratory, a wrench that seemed to distort space and time.

Then, as abruptly as it had come, it was gone. But when it ended,
something gigantic and incomprehensibly powerful seemed to rush
soundlessly by ... something that was felt and sensed. It was like a
great noiseless, breathless wind in the dead of night that rushed by
them and through them, all about them in space and died slowly away.

But the vanished steel did not reappear with the disappearance of the
sphere and the draining away of power. Almost grotesuely now, the
handler stood poised above the place where the sphere had been and in
its aws it held the bar. But the end of the bar, the eight inches that
had been within the sphere, was gone. It had been sliced off so sharply
that it left a highly reflective concave mirror on the severed surface.

Where is it? demanded Manning. In that higher dimension?

Russ shook his head. ou noticed that rushing sensation? That may have
been the energy of matter rushing into some other space. It may be the
key to the energy of matter

Gregory Manning stared at the bar. Im staying with you, Russ. Im
seeing this thing through.

I knew you would, said Russ.

Triumph flamed briefly in Mannings eyes. And when we finish, well
have something that will break Interplanetary. Well smash their
stranglehold on the Solar System. e stopped and looked at age. ord,
Russ, he whispered, do you realize what well have?

I think I do, Greg, the scientist answered soberly. Material energy
engines. ower so cheap that you wont be able to give it away. More
power than anybody could ever need.




CATR TR


Russ hunched over the keyboard set in the control room of the Comet
and stared down at the keys. The euation was set and ready. All he had
to do was tap that key and they would know, beyond all argument, whether
or not they had dipped into the awful heart of material energy whether,
finally, they held in their grasp the key to the release of energy that
would give the System power to spare.

is glance lifted from the keyboard, looked out the observation port.
Through the inkiness of space ran a faint blue thread, a tiny line that
stretched from the ship and away until it was lost in the darkness of
the void.

ne hundred thousand miles away, that thread touched the surface of a
steel ball bearing ... a speck in the immensity of space.

e thought about that little beam of blue. It took power to do that,
power to hold a beam tight and strong and steady through the stress of
one hundred thousand miles. But it had to be that far away ... and they
had that power. From the bowels of the ship came the deep purr of it,
the angry, silky song of mighty engines throttled down.

e heard arry Wilson shuffling impatiently behind him, smelled the
acrid smoke that floated from the tip of Wilsons cigarette.

Might as well punch that key, Russ, said Mannings cool voice. We
have to find out sooner or later.

Russs finger hovered over the key, steadied and held. When he punched
that key, if everything worked right, the energy in the tiny ball
bearing would be released instantaneously. The energy of a piece of
steel, weighing less than an ounce. ver that tight beam of blue would
flash the impulse of destruction....

is fingers plunged down.

Space flamed in front of them. For ust an instant the void seemed
filled with an angry, bursting fire that lapped with hungry tongues of
cold, blue light toward the distant planets. A flare so intense that it
was visible on the ovian worlds, three hundred million miles away. It
lighted the nightside of arth, blotting out the stars and Moon,
sending astronomers scurrying for their telescopes, rating foothigh
streamers in the night editions.

Slowly Russ turned around and faced his friend.

We have it, Greg, he said. We really have it. Weve tested the
control formulas all along the line. We know what we can do.

We dont know it all yet, declared Greg. We know we can make it work,
but I have a feeling we havent more than skimmed the surface
possibilities.

                                   

Russ sank into a chair and stared about the room. They knew they could
generate alternating current of any freuency they chose by use of a
special collector apparatus. They could release radiant energy in almost
any uantity they desired, in any wavelength, from the longest radio to
the incredibly hard cosmics. The electrical power they could measure
accurately and easily by simple voltmeters and ammeters. But radiant
energy was another thing. When it passed all hitherto known bonds, it
would simply fuse any instrument they might use to measure it.

But they knew the power they generated. In one split second they had
burst the energy bonds of a tiny bit of steel and that energy had glared
briefly more hotly than the Sun.

Greg, he said, it isnt often you can say that any event was the
beginning of a new era. ou can with thisthe era of unlimited power.
It kind of scares me.

p until a hundred years ago coal and oil and oygen had been the main
power sources, but with the dwindling of the supply of coal and oil, man
had sought another way. e had turned back to the old dream of snatching
power direct from the Sun. In the year  atterson had perfected the
photocell. Then the Aleanderson accumulators made it possible to pump
the lifeblood of power to the far reaches of the System, and on Mercury
and enus, and to a lesser etent on arth, great accumulator power
plants had sprung up, with Interplanetary, under the driving genius of
Spencer Chambers, gaining control of the market.

The photocell and the accumulator had spurred interplanetary trade and
settlement. ntil it had been possible to store Sunpower for the
driving of spaceships and for shipment to the outer planets, ships had
been driven by rocket fuel, and the struggling colonies on the outer
worlds had fought a bitter battle without the aid of ready power.

Coal and oil there were in plenty on the outer worlds, but one other
essential was lacking ... oygen. Coal on Mars, for instance, had to
burned under synthetic air pressures, like the old carburetor. The
result was inefficiency. A lot of coal burned, not enough power
delivered.

ven the photocells were inefficient when attempts were made to operate
them beyond the arth that was the maimum distance for maimum Solar
efficiency.

Russ dug into the pocket of his faded, scuffed leather acket and hauled
forth pipe and pouch. Thoughtfully he tamped the tobacco into the bowl.

Three months, he said. Three months of damn hard work.

eah, agreed Wilson, we sure have worked.

Wilsons face was haggard, his eyes red. e blew smoke through his
nostrils.

When we get back, how about us taking a little vacation? he asked.

Russ laughed. ou can if you want to. Greg and I are keeping on.

We cant waste time, Manning said. Spencer Chambers may get wind of
this. ed move all hell to stop us.

Wilson spat out his cigarette. Why dont you patent what you have? That
would protect you.

                                   

Russ grinned, but it was a sour one.

No use, said Greg. Chambers would tie us up in a mile of legal red
tape. It would be ust like walking up and handing it to him.

ou guys go ahead and work, Wilson stated. Im taking a vacation.
Three months is too damn long to stay out in a spaceship.

It doesnt seem long to me, said Greg, his tone cold and sharp.

No, thought Russ, it hadnt seemed long. erhaps the hours had been
rough, the work hard, but he hadnt noticed. Sleep and food had come in
snatches. For three months they had worked in space, not daring to carry
out their eperiments on arth ... frankly afraid of the thing they had.

e glanced at Manning.

The three months had left no mark upon him, no hint of fatigue or
strain. Russ understood now how Manning had done the things he did. The
man was all steel and flame. Nothing could touch him.

We still have a lot to do, said Manning.

Russ leaned back and puffed at his pipe.

es, there was a lot to do. Transmission problems, for instance. To
conduct away such terrific power as they knew they were capable of
developing would reuire copper or silver bars as thick as a mans
thigh, and even so at voltages capable of umping a twofoot spark gap.

bviously, a small machine such as they now had would be impractical. No
matter how perfectly it might be insulated, the atmosphere itself would
not be an insulator, with power such as this. And if one tried to
deliver the energy as a mechanical rotation of a shaft, what shaft could
transmit it safely and under control?

h, hell, Russ burst out, lets get back to arth.

                                   

arry Wilson watched the couple alight from the aerotai, walk up the
broad steps and pass through the magic portals of the Martian Club. e
could imagine what the club was like, the deference of the management,
the eotic atmosphere of the dining room, the ecellence of the long,
cold drinks served at the bar. Mysterious drinks concocted of
ingredients harvested in the ungles of enus, spiced with produce from
the irrigated gardens of Mars.

e puffed on the dangling cigarette and shuffled on along the airy
highwalk. Below and above him, all around him flowed the beauty and the
glamor, the bravery and the splendor of New ork. The citys song was in
his ears, the surging noises that were its voice.

Two thousand feet above his head reared giant pinnacles of shining
metal, glinting in the noonday sun, architecture that bore the alien
stamp of other worlds.

Wilson turned around, stared at the Martian Club. A man needed money to
pass through those doors, to taste the drinks that slid across its bar,
to sit and watch its floor shows, to hear the music of its orchestras.

For a moment he stood, hesitating, as if he were trying to make up his
mind. e flipped away the cigarette, turned on his heel, walked briskly
to the automatic elevator which would take him to the lower levels.

There, on the third level, he entered a Mecho restaurant, sat down at a
table and ordered from the robot waiter, pushing ivorytipped buttons on
the menu before him.

e ate leisurely, smoked ferociously, thinking. ooking at his watch, he
saw that it was nearly two oclock. e walked to the cashier machine,
inserted the metallic check with the correct change and received from
the clicking, chuckling register the disk that would let him out the
door.

Thank you, come again, the cashierrobot fluted.

ont mention it, growled Wilson.

utside the restaurant he walked briskly. Ten blocks away he came to a
building roofing four suare blocks. ver the massive doorway, set into
the beryllium steel, was a map of the Solar System, a map that served as
a cosmic clock, tracing the movement of the planets as they swung in
their long arcs around the Sun. The Solar System was straddled by
glowing, golden letters. They read INTRANTAR BIING.

It was from here that Spencer Chambers ruled his empire built on power.

Wilson went inside.




CATR FR


The new apparatus was set up, a machine that almost filled the
laboratory ... a giant, compact mass of heavy, solidly built metal work,
tied together by beams of girderlike construction. It was meant to stand
up under the hammering of unimaginable power, the stress of unknown
spatial factors.

Slowly, carefully, Russell age tapped keys on the control board,
setting up an euation. Sucking thoughtfully at his pipe, he checked and
rechecked them.

arry Wilson regarded him through suinted eyes.

What the hell is going to happen now? he asked.

Well have to wait and see, Russ answered. We know what we want to
happen, what we hope will happen, but we never can be sure. We are
working with conditions that are entirely new.

Sitting beside a table littered with papers, staring at the gigantic
machine before him, Gregory Manning said slowly That thing simply has
to adapt itself to spaceship drive. Theres everything there thats
needed for space propulsion. nlimited power from a minimum of fuel.
Splitsecond efficiency. ntire independence of any set condition,
because the stuff creates its own conditions.

e slowly wagged his head.

The secret is some place along the line, he declared. I feel that we
must be getting close to it.

Russ walked from the control board to the table, picked up a sheaf of
papers and leafed through them. e selected a handful and shook them in
his fist.

I thought I had it here, he said. My math must have been wrong, some
factor that I didnt include in the euation.

oull keep finding factors for some time yet, Greg prophesied.

Repulsion would have been the answer, said Russ bitterly. And the
ord knows we have it. lenty of it.

Too much, observed Wilson, smoke drooling from his nostrils.

Not too much, corrected Greg. Inefficient control. ou ump at
conclusions, Wilson.

The math didnt show that progressive action, said Russ. It showed
repulsion, negative gravity that could be built up until it would shoot
the ship outside the Solar System within an hours time. Faster than
light. We dont know how many times faster.

Forget it, advised Greg. The way it stands, its useless. ou get
repulsion by progressive steps. A series of suares with one constant
factor. It wouldnt be any good for space travel. Imagine trying to use
it on a spaceship. oud start with a terrific olt. The acceleration
would fade and ust when you were recovering from the first olt, youd
get a second one and that second one would iron you out. A spaceship
couldnt take it, let alone a human body.

                                   

Maybe this will do it, said Wilson hopefully.

Maybe, agreed Russ. Anyhow well try it. uation .

It might do the trick, said Greg. Its a new approach to the gravity
angle. The euation eplains the shifting of gravitational lines, the
changing and contortion of their direction. Twist gravity and you have a
perfect space drive. As good as negative gravity. Better, perhaps, more
easily controlled. Would make for more delicate, precise handling.

Russ laid down the sheaf of papers, lit his pipe and walked to the
apparatus.

ere goes, he said.

is hand went out to the power lever, eased it in. With a roar the
material energy engine built within the apparatus surged into action,
sending a flow of power through the massive leads. The thunder mounted
in the room. The laboratory seemed to shudder with the impact.

Wilson, watching intently, cried out, a brief, chokedoff cry. A wave of
dizziness engulfed him. The walls seemed to be falling in. The room and
the machine were blurring. Russ, at the controls, seemed horribly
disointed. Manning was a caricature of a man, a weird, strange figure
that moved and gestured in the mad room.

Wilson fought against the dizziness. e tried to take a step and the
floor seemed to leap up and meet his outstretched foot, throwing him off
balance. is cigarette fell out of his mouth, rolled along the floor.

Russ was shouting something, but the words were distorted, loud one
instant, rising over the din of the apparatus, a mere whisper the net.
They made no sense.

There was a peculiar whistling in the air, a sound such as he had never
heard before. It seemed to come from far away, a high, thin shriek that
was torture in ones ears.

Giddy, seized with deathly nausea, Wilson clawed his way across the
floor, swung open the laboratory door and stumbled outdoors. e weaved
across the lawn and clung to a sun dial, panting.

e looked back at the laboratory and gasped in disbelief. All the trees
were bent toward the building, as if held by some mighty wind. Their
branches straining, every single leaf standing at rigid attention, the
trees were bending in toward the structure. But there was no wind.

And then he noticed something else. No matter where the trees stood, no
matter in what direction from the laboratory, they all bent inward
toward the building ... and the whining, thundering, shrieking machine.

Inside the laboratory an empty bottle crashed off a table and smashed
into a thousand fragments. The tinkling of the broken glass was a
silvery, momentary sound that protested against the blasting thrum of
power that shook the walls.

Manning fought along the floor to Russs side. Russ roared in his ear
Gravitational control Concentration of gravitational lines

The papers on the desk started to slide, slithering onto the floor,
danced a crazy dervish across the room. iuids in the laboratory
bottles were climbing the sides of glass, instead of lying at rest
parallel with the floor. A chair skated, bucking and tipping crazily,
toward the door.

                                   

Russ erked the power lever back to zero. The power hum died. The
liuids slid back to their natural level, the chair tipped over and lay
still, papers fluttered gently downward.

The two men looked at one another across the few feet of floor space
between them. Russ wiped beads of perspiration from his forehead with
his shirt sleeve. e sucked on his pipe, but it was dead.

Greg, Russ said ubilantly, we have something better than
antigravity We have something you might call positive gravity ...
gravity that we can control. our grandfather nullified gravity. Weve
gone him one better.

Greg gestured toward the machine. ou created an attraction center.
What else?

But the center itself is not actually an attracting force. The fourth
dimension is mied up in this. We have a sort of fourthdimensional lens
that concentrates the lines of any gravitational force. Concentration in
the fourth dimension turns the force loose in three dimensions, but we
can take care of that by using mirrors of our antientropy. We can
arrange it so that it turns the force loose in only one dimension.

Greg was thoughtful for a moment. We can guide a ship by a series of
lenses, he declared at last. But heres the really important thing.
That field concentrates the forces of gravity already present. Those
forces eist throughout all of space. There are gravitational lines
everywhere. We can concentrate them in any direction we want to. In
reality, we fall toward the body which originally caused the force of
gravitation, not to the concentration.

                                   

Russ nodded. That means we can create a field immediately ahead of the
ship. The ship would fall into it constantly, with the concentration
moving on ahead. The field would tend to break down in proportion to the
strain imposed and a big ship, especially when you are building up
speed, would tend to enlarge it, open it up. But the field could be kept
tight by supplying energy and we have plenty of that ... far more than
wed ever need. We supply the energy, but thats only a small part of
it. The body emitting the gravitational force supplies the fulcrum that
moves us along.

It would operate beyond the planets, said Greg. It would operate
eually well anywhere in space, for all of space is filled with
gravitational stress. We could use gravitational bodies many light years
away as the driver of our ships.

A halfwild light glowed momentarily in his eyes.

Russ, he said, were going to put space fields to work at last.

e walked to the chair, picked it up and sat down in it.

Well start building a ship, he stated, ust as soon as we know the
mechanics of this gravity concentration and control. Russ, well build
the greatest ship, the fastest ship, the most powerful ship the Solar
System has ever known

                                   

amn, said Russ, that things slipped again.

e glared at the offending nut. Ill put a lock washer on it this
time.

Wilson stepped toward the control board. From his perch on the
apparatus, Russ motioned him away.

Never mind discharging the field, he said. I can get around it
somehow.

Wilson suinted at him. This tooth is near killing me.

Still got a toothache? asked Russ.

Never got a wink of sleep last night.

ou better run down to Frisco and have it yanked out, suggested the
scientist. Cant have you laid up.

eah, thats right, agreed Wilson. Maybe I will. We got a lot to do.

Russ reached out and clamped his wrench on the nut, uickly backed it
off and slipped on the washer. iciously he tightened it home. The
wrench stuck.

Gritting his teeth on the bit of his pipe, Russ cursed soundlessly. e
yanked savagely at the wrench. It slipped from his hand, hung for a
minute on the nut and then plunged downward, falling straight into the
heart of the new force field they had developed.

Russ froze and watched, his heart in his throat, mad thoughts in his
brain. In a flash, as the wrench fell, he remembered that they knew
nothing about this field. All they knew was that any matter introduced
in it suddenly acuired an acceleration in the dimension known as time,
with its normal constant of duration reduced to zero.

When that wrench struck the field, it would cease to eist But
something else might happen, too, something entirely unguessable.

The wrench fell only a few feet, but it seemed to take long seconds as
Russ watched, frozen in fascination.

e saw it strike the hazy glow that defined the limits of the field, saw
it floating down, as if its speed had been slowed by some dense medium.

In the instant that hazy glow intensified a thousand timesbecame a
blinding sunburst Russ ducked his head, shielded his eyes from the
terrible blast of light. A rending, shuddering thud seemed to echo ...
in space rather than in air ... and both field and wrench were gone

A moment passed, then another, and there was the heavy, solid clanging
thud of something striking metal. This time the thud was not in space,
but a commonplace noise, as if someone had dropped a tool on the floor
above.

Russ turned around and stared at Wilson. Wilson stared back, his mouth
hanging open, the smoldering, cigarette dangling from his mouth.

Greg Russ shouted, his cry shattering the silence in the laboratory.

A door burst open and Manning stepped into the main laboratory room, a
calculation pad in one hand, a pencil in the other.

Whats the matter? he demanded.

We have to find my wrench

our wrench? Greg was puzzled. Cant you get another?

I dropped it into the field. Its timedimension was reduced to zero. It
became an instantaneous wrench.

Nothing new in that, said Greg, unruffled.

But there is, persisted Russ. The field collapsed, you see. Maybe the
wrench was too big for it to handle. And when the field collapsed the
wrench gained a new timedimension. I heard it. We have to find it.

The three of them pounded up the stairs to the room where Russ had heard
the thump. There was nothing on the floor. They searched the room from
end to end, then the other rooms. There was no wrench.

At the end of an hour Greg went back to the main laboratory, brought
back a portable fluoroscope.

Maybe this will do the trick, he announced bleakly.

                                   

It did. They found the wrench inside the space between the walls

Russ stared at the shadow in the fluoroscope plate. ndeniably it was
the shadow of the wrench.

Fourth dimension, he said. Transported in time.

The muscles in Gregs cheeks were tensed, that old flame of ecitement
burning in his eyes, but otherwise his face was the mask of old, the
calm, almost terrible mask that had faced a thousand dangers.

ower and time, he corrected.

If we can control it, said Russ.

ont worry. We can control it. And when we can, its the biggest thing
weve got.

Wilson licked his lips, dredged a cigarette out of a pocket.

If you dont mind, he said, Ill hit for Frisco tonight. This tooth
of mine is getting worse.

Sure, cant keep an aching tooth, agreed Russ, thinking of the wrench
while talking.

Can I take your ship? asked Wilson.

Sure, said Russ.

Back in the laboratory they rebuilt the field, dropped little ball
bearings in it. The ball bearings disappeared. They found them
everywherein the walls, in tables, in the floor. Some, still eisting
in their new timedimension, hung in midair, invisible, intangible, but
there.

ours followed hours, with the sheet of data growing. Math machines
whirred and chuckled and clicked. Wilson departed for San Francisco with
his aching tooth. The other two worked on. By dawn they knew what they
were doing. ut of the chaos of happenstance they were finding rules of
order, certain formulas of behavior, euations of force.

The net day they tried heavier, more complicated things and learned
still more.

A radiogram, phoned from the nearest spaceport, forty miles distant,
informed them that Wilson would not be back for a few days. is tooth
was worse than he had thought, reuired an operation and treatment of
the aw.

ell, said Russ, ust when he could be so much help.

With Wilson gone the two of them tackled the controlling device, labored
and swore over it. But finally it was completed.

Slumped in chairs, utterly ehausted, they looked proudly at it.

With that, said Russ, we can take an obect and transport it any
place we want. Not only that, we can pick up any obect from an
indefinite distance and bring it to us.

What a thing for a lazy burglar, Greg observed sourly.

Worn out, they gulped sandwiches and scalding coffee, tumbled into bed.

                                   

The outdoor camp meeting was in full swing. The evangelist was in his
top form. The sinners bench was crowded. Then suddenly, as the
evangelist paused for a moments silence before he drove home an
important point, the music came. Music from the air. Music from
somewhere in the sky. The soft, heavenly music of a hymn. As if an
angels chorus were singing in the blue.

The evangelist froze, one arm pointing upward, with inde finger ready
to sweep down and emphasize his point. The sinners kneeling at the bench
were petrified. The congregation was astounded.

The hymn rolled on, punctuated, backgrounded by deep celestial organ
notes. The clear voice of the choir swept high to a belllike note.

Behold shrieked the evangelist. Behold, a miracle Angels singing
for us neel neel and pray

Nobody stood.

                                   

Andy McIntyre was drunk again. In the piteous glare of midmorning, he
staggered homeward from the poker party in the back of Steve Abrams
harness shop. The light revealed him to the scorn of the entire village.

At the corner of lm and Third he ran into a maple tree. ncertainly he
backed away, intent on making another try. Suddenly the tree spoke to
him

Alcohol is the scourge of mankind. It turns men into beasts. It robs
them of their brains, it shortens their lives ...

Andy stared, unable to believe what he heard. The tree, he had no doubt,
was talking to him personally.

The voice of the tree went on ... takes the bread out of the mouths of
women and children. Fosters crime. Weakens the moral fiber of the
nation.

Stop screamed Andy. Stop, I tell you

The tree stopped talking. All he could hear was the whisper of wind
among its autumntinted leaves.

Suddenly running, Andy darted around the corner, headed home.

Begad, he told himself, when trees start talkin to you its time to
lay off the bottle

                                   

In another town fifty miles distant from the one in which the tree had
talked to Andy McIntyre, another miracle happened that same Sunday
morning.

ozens of people heard the bronze statue of the soldier in the courtyard
speak. The statue did not come to life. It stood as ever, a solid piece
of golden bronze, in spots turned black and green by weather. But from
its lips came words ... words that burned themselves into the souls of
those who heard. Words that ehorted them to defend the principles for
which many men had died, to grasp and hold high the torch of democracy
and liberty.

In somber bitterness, the statue called Spencer Chambers the greatest
threat to that liberty and freedom. For, the statue said, Spencer
Chambers and Interplanetary ower were waging an economic war, a
bloodless one, but ust as truly war as if there were cannons firing and
bombs eploding.

For a full five minutes the statue spoke and the crowd, growing by the
minute, stood dumbfounded.

Then silence fell over the courtyard. The statue stood as before,
unmoving, its timeless eyes staring out from under the ugly helmet, its
hands gripping the bayoneted rifle. A blue and white pigeon fluttered
softly down, alighted on the bayonet, looked the crowd over and then
flew to the courthouse tower.

                                   

Back in the laboratory, Russ looked at Greg.

That radio trick gives me an idea, he said. If we can put a radio in
statues and trees without interfering with its operation, why cant we
do the same thing with a television set?

Greg started. Think of the possibilities of that he burst out.

Within an hour a complete television sending apparatus was placed within
the field and a receptor screen set up in the laboratory.

The two moved chairs in front of the screen and sat down. Russ reached
out and pulled the switch of the field control. The screen came to life,
but it was only a gray blur.

Its traveling too fast, said Greg. Slow it down.

Russ retarded the lever. When that things on full, its almost
instantaneous. It travels in a time dimension and any speed slower than
instantaneity is a modification of that force field.

n the screen swam a panorama of the mountains, mile after mile of
snowcapped peaks and valleys ablaze with the flames of autumn foliage.
The mountains faded away. There was desert now and then a city. Russ
dropped the televisor set lower, down into a street. For half an hour
they sat comfortably in their chairs and watched men and women walking,
witnessed one dog fight, cruised slowly up and down, looking into
windows of homes, windowshopping in the business section.

Theres ust one thing wrong, said Greg. We can see everything, but
we cant hear a sound.

We can fi that, Russ told him.

e lifted the televisor set from the streets, brought it back across the
desert and mountains into the laboratory.

We have two practical applications now, said Greg. Space drive and
television spying. I dont know which is the best. o you realize that
with this television trick there isnt a thing that can be hidden from
us?

I believe we can go to Mars or Mercury or anywhere we want to with this
thing. It doesnt seem to have any particular limits. It handles
perfectly. ou can move it a fraction of an inch as easily as a hundred
miles. And its fast. Almost instantaneous. Not uite, for even with
our acceleration within time, there is a slight lag.

By evening they had an audio apparatus incorporated in the set, had
wired the screen for sound.

ets put this to practical use, suggested Greg. Theres a show at
the New Mercury Theater in New ork Ive been wanting to see. ets
knock off work and take in that show.

Now, said Russ, you really have an idea. The ticket scalpers are
charging a fortune, and it wont cost us a cent to get in




CATR FI


ine roots burned brightly in the fireplace, snapping and sizzling as
the blaze caught and flamed on the resin. eep in an easy chair, Greg
Manning stretched his long legs out toward the fire and lifted his
glass, suinting at the flames through the amber drink.

Theres something thats been worrying me a little, he said. I hadnt
told you about it because I figured it wasnt as serious as it looked.
Maybe it isnt, but it looks funny.

Whats that? asked Russ.

The stock market, replied Greg. Theres something devilish funny
going on there. Ive lost about a billion dollars in the last two
weeks.

A billion dollars? gasped Russ.

Greg swirled the whiskey in his glass. ont sound so horrified. The
loss is all on paper. My stocks have gone down. Most of them cut in
half. Some even less than that. Martian Irrigation is down to . I paid
 for it. Its worth .

ou mean something has happened to the market?

Not to the market. If that was it, I wouldnt worry. Ive seen the
market go up and down. Thats nothing to worry about. But the market,
ecept for a slight depression, has behaved normally in these past two
weeks. It almost looks as if somebody was out to get me.

Whod want to and why?

Greg sighed. I wish I knew. I havent really lost a cent, of course. My
shares cant stay down for very long. The thing is that right now I
cant sell them even for what I paid for them. If I sold now Id lose
that billion. But as long as I dont have to sell, the loss is merely on
paper.

e sipped at the drink and stared into the fire.

If you dont have to, what are you worrying about? asked Russ.

Couple of things. I put that stock up as collateral to get the cash to
build the spaceship. At present prices, it will take more securities
than I thought. If the prices continue to go down, Ill have the bulk of
my holdings tied up in the spaceship. I might even be forced to
liuidate some of it and that would mean an actual loss.

e hunched forward in the chair, stared at Russ.

Another thing, he said grimly, is that I hate the idea of somebody
singling me out as a target. As if they were going to make a financial
eample of me.

And it sounds as if someone has, agreed Russ.

Greg leaned back again, drained his glass and set it down.

It certainly does, he said.

utside, seen through the window beside the fireplace, the harvest moon
was a shield of silver hung in the velvet of the sky. A lonesome wind
moaned in the pines and under the eaves.

I got a report from Belgium the other day, said Greg. The spaceship
is coming along. Itll be the biggest thing afloat in space.

The biggest and the toughest, said Russ, and Greg nodded silent
agreement.

The ship itself was being manufactured at the great Space Works in
Belgium, but other parts of it, apparatus, engines, gadgets of every
description, were being manufactured at other widely scattered points.
Anyone wondering what kind of ship the finished product would be would
have a hard time gathering the correct information, which, of course,
was the idea. The anyone they were guarding against was Spencer
Chambers.

                                   

We need a better television set, said Russ. This one we have is all
right, but we need the best there is. I wonder if Wilson could get us
one in Frisco and bring it back.

I dont see why not, said Greg. Send him a radio.

Russ stepped to the phone, called the spaceport and filed the message.

e always stays at the Greater Martian, he told Greg. Well probably
catch him there.

                                   

Two hours later the phone rang. It was the spaceport.

That message you sent to Wilson, said the voice of the operator,
cant be delivered. Wilson isnt at the Greater Martian. The clerk said
he checked out for New ork last night.

idnt he leave a forwarding address? asked Russ.

Apparently not.

Russ hung up the receiver, frowning. Wilson is in New ork.

Greg looked up from a sheet of calculations.

New ork, eh? he said and then went back to work, but a moment later
he straightened from his work. What would Wilson be doing in New ork?

I wonder ... Russ stopped and shook his head.

actly, said Greg. e glanced out of the window, considering, the
muscles in his cheeks knotting. Russ, we both are thinking the same
thing.

I hate to think it, said Russ evenly. I hate to think such a thing
about a man.

ne way to find out, declared Greg. e rose from the chair and walked
to the television control board, snapped the switch. Russ took a chair
beside him. n the screen the mountains danced weirdly as the set
rocketed swiftly away and then came the glint of red and yellow desert.
Blackness blanked out the screen as the set plunged into the ground,
passing through the curvature of the arths surface. The blackness
passed and fields and farms were beneath them on the screen, a green and
brown checkerboard with tiny white lines that were roads.

New ork was in the screen now. Gregs hand moved the control and the
city rushed up at them, the spires speeding toward them like plunging
spears. own into the canyons plunged the set, down into the financial
district with its beetling buildings that hemmed in the roaring traffic.

Grimly, surely, Greg drove his strange machine through New ork. Through
buildings, through shimmering planes, through men. ike an arrow the
television set sped to its mark and then Gregs hand snapped back the
lever and in the screen was a building that covered four whole blocks.
Above the entrance was the famous Solar System map and straddling the
map were the gleaming golden letters INTRANTAR BIING.

Now well see, said Greg.

e heard the whistle of the breath in Russs nostrils as the television
set began to move, saw the tight grip Russ had upon the chair arms.

The interior of the building showed on the screen as he drove the set
through steel and stone, offices and corridors and brief glimpses of
steel partitions, until it came to a door marked SNCR CAMBRS,
RSINT.

Gregs hand twisted the control slightly and the set went through the
door, into the office of Spencer Chambers.

Four men were in the roomChambers himself Craven, the scientist
Arnold Grant, head of Interplanetarys publicity department, and arry
Wilson

Wilsons voice came out of the screen, a frantic, almost terrified
voice.

Ive told you all I know. Im not a scientist. Im a mechanic. Ive
told you what theyre doing. I cant tell you how they do it.

Arnold Grant leaned forward in his chair. is face was twisted in fury.

There were plans, werent there? he demanded. There were euations
and formulas. Why didnt you bring us some of them?

Spencer Chambers raised a hand from the desk, waved it toward Grant.
The man has told us all he knows. bviously, he cant be any more help
to us.

ou told him to go back and see if he couldnt find something else,
didnt you? asked Grant.

es, I did, Chambers told him. But apparently he couldnt find it.

I tried, pleaded Wilson. erspiration stood out on his forehead. The
cigarette in his mouth was limp and dead. ne of them was always there.
I never could get hold of any papers. I asked uestions, but they were
too busy to answer. And I couldnt ask too much, because then they would
have suspected me.

No, you couldnt do that, commented Craven with an open sneer.

                                   

In the laboratory Russ pounded the arm of his chair with a clenched
fist. The rat sold us out

Greg said nothing, but his face was stony and his eyes were
crystalhard.

n the screen Chambers was speaking to Wilson. o you think you could
find something out if you went back again?

Wilson suirmed in his chair.

Id rather not. is voice sounded like a whimper. Im afraid they
suspect me now. Im afraid of what theyd do if they found out.

Thats his conscience, breathed Russ in the laboratory. I never
suspected him.

es right about one thing, though, Greg said. ed better not come
back.

Chambers was talking again ou realize, of course, that you havent
been much help to us. ou have only warned us that another kind of power
generation is being developed. ouve set us on our guard, but other
than that were no better off than we were before.

Wilson bristled, like a cowardly animal backed into a corner. I told
you what was going on. ou can be ready for it now. I cant help it if I
couldnt find out how all them things worked.

ook here, said Chambers. I made a bargain with you and I keep my
bargains. I told you I would pay you twenty thousand dollars for the
information you gave me when you first came to see me. I told you Id
pay you for any further additional information you might give. Also I
promised you a ob with the company.

Watching the financier, Wilson licked his lips. Thats right, he said.

Chambers reached out and pulled a checkbook toward him, lifted a pen
from its holder. Im paying you the twenty thousand for the warning.
Im not paying you a dime more, because you gave me no other
information.

Wilson leaped to his feet, started to protest.

Sit down, said Chambers coldly.

But the ob ou said youd give me a ob

Chambers shook his head. I wouldnt have a man like you in my
organization. If you were a traitor to one man, you would be to
another.

But ... but ... Wilson started to obect and then sat down, his face
twisted in something that came very close to fear.

Chambers ripped the check out of the book, waved it slowly in the air to
dry it. Then he arose and held it out to Wilson, who reached out a
trembling hand and took it.

And now, said Chambers, good day, Mr. Wilson.

For a moment Wilson stood uncertain, as if he intended to speak, but
finally he turned, without a word, and walked through the door.

                                   

In the laboratory Russ and Greg looked at one another.

Twenty thousand, said Greg. Why, that was worth millions.

It was worth everything Chambers had, said Russ, because its the
thing thats going to wreck him.

Their attention snapped back to the screen.

Chambers was hunched over his desk, addressing the other two.

Now, gentlemen, he asked, what are we to do?

Craven shrugged his shoulders. There was a puzzled frown in the eyes
back of the thicklensed glasses. We havent much to go on. Wilson
doesnt know a thing about it. e hasnt the brain to grasp even the
most fundamental ideas back of the whole thing.

Chambers nodded. The man knew the mechanical setup perfectly, but that
was all.

Ive constructed the apparatus, said Craven. Its astoundingly
simple. Almost too simple to do the things Wilson said it would do. e
drew plans for it, so clear that it was easy to duplicate the apparatus.
e himself checked the machine and says it is the same as age and
Manning have. But there are thousands of possible combinations for
hookups and control board settings. Too many to try to go through and
hit upon the right answer. Because, you see, one slight adustment in
any one of a hundred adustments might do the trick ... but which of
those adustments do you have to make? We have to have the formulas, the
euations, before we can even move.

e seemed to remember a few things, said Grant hopefully. Certain
rules and formulas.

Craven flipped both his hands angrily. Worse than nothing, he
eploded. What age and Manning have done is so far in advance of
anything that anyone else has even thought about that we are completely
at sea. Theyre working with space fields, apparently, and we havent
even scratched the surface in that branch of investigation. We simply
havent got a thing to go on.

                                   

No chance at all? asked Chambers.

Craven shook his head slowly.

At least you could try, snapped Grant.

Now, wait, Chambers snapped back. ou seem to forget r. Craven is
one of the best scientists in the world today. Im relying on him.

Craven smiled. I cant do anything with what age and Manning have, but
I might try something of my own.

By all means do so, urged Chambers. e turned to Grant. I observed
you have carried out the plans we laid. Martian Irrigation hit a new low
today.

Grant grinned. It was easy. ust a hint here and there to the right
people.

Chambers looked down at his hands, slowly closing into fists. We have
to stop them some way, any way at all. eep up the rumors. Well make
it impossible for Greg Manning to finance this new invention. Well take
away every last dollar he has.

e glared at the publicity man. ou understand?

es, sir, said Grant, I understand perfectly.

All right, said Chambers. And your ob, Craven, is to either develop
what age has found or find something we can use in competition.

Craven growled angrily. What happens if your damn rumors cant ruin
Manning? What if I cant find anything?

In that case, said Chambers, there are other ways.

ther ways?

Chambers suddenly smiled at them. I have a notion to call Stutsman back
to arth.

Craven drummed his fingers idly on the arm of his chair. es, I guess
you do have other ways, he said.

                                   

Gregs hand snapped the switch and the screen suddenly was blank as the
televisor set returned instantly to the laboratory.

That eplains a lot of things, he said. Among them what has happened
to my stocks.

Russ sat in his chair, numbed. That little weakkneed, ratting traitor,
Wilson. ed sell his mother for a new tendollar bill.

We know, said Greg, and Chambers doesnt know we know. Well follow
every move he makes. Well know every one of his plans.

acing up and down the room, he was already planning their campaign.

There are still a few things to do, he added. A few possibilities we
may have overlooked.

But will we have time? asked Russ.

I think so. Chambers is going to go slow. The gamble is too big to risk
any slip. e doesnt want to get in bad with the law. There wont be any
strongarm stuff ... not until he recalls Stutsman from Callisto.

e paused in midstride, stood planted solidly on the floor.

When Stutsman gets into the game, he said, all hell will break
loose.

e took a deep breath.

But well be ready for it then




CATR SI


If we can get television reception with this apparatus of ours, asked
Greg, what is to prevent us from televising? Why cant we send as well
as receive?

Russ drew doodles on a calculation sheet. We could. ust something else
to work out. ou must remember were working in a fourdimensional
medium. That would complicate matters a little. Not like working in
three dimensions alone. It would ...

e stopped. The pencil fell from his finger and he swung around slowly
to face Manning.

Whats the matter now? asked Greg.

ook, said Russ ecitedly. Were working in four dimensions. And if
we televised through four dimensions, what would we get?

Greg wrinkled his brow. Suddenly his face relaed. ou dont mean we
can televise in three dimensions, do you?

Thats what it should work out to, declared Russ. e swung back to the
table again, picked up his pencil and otted down euations. e looked
up from the sheet. Threedimensional television he almost whispered.

Something new again, commented Greg.

Ill say its new

Russ reached out and erked a calculator toward him. Rapidly he set up
the euations, pressed the tabulator lever. The machine gurgled and
chuckled, clicked out the result. Bending over to read it, Russ sucked
in his breath.

Its working out right, he said.

Thatll mean new euipment, lots of it, Greg pointed out. Wilsons
gone, damn him. Whos going to help us?

Well do it ourselves, said Russ. When were the only ones here, we
can be sure there wont be any leak.

It took hours of work on the math machines, but at the end of that time
Russ was certain of his ground.

Now we go to work, he said, gleefully.

In a weeks time they had built a triple televisor, but simplifications
of the standard commercial set gave them a mechanism that weighed little
more and was far more efficient and accurate.

uring the time the work went on they maintained a watch over both the
office of Spencer Chambers and the laboratory in which r. erbert
Craven worked  hours a day. nseen, unsuspected, they were silent
companions of the two men during many hours. They read what the men
wrote, read what was written to them, heard what they said, saw how they
acted. oing so, the pair in the high mountain laboratory gained a deep
insight into the characters of unsuspecting uarries.

Both utterly ruthless, declared Greg. But apparently men who are
sincere in thinking that the spoils belong to the strong. Strange,
almost outdated men. ou cant help but like Chambers. es good enough
at heart. e has his pet charities. e really, I believe, wants to help
the people. And I think he actually believes the best way to do it is to
gain a dictatorship over the Solar System. That ambition rules
everything in his life. It has hardened him and strengthened him. e
will crush ruthlessly, without a single ualm, anything that stands in
his path. Thats why well have a fight on our hands.

                                   

Craven seemed to be making little progress. They could only guess at
what he was trying to develop.

I think, said Russ, hes working on a collector field to suck in
radiant energy. If he really gets that, it will be something worth
having.

For hours Craven sat, an intent, untidy, unkempt man, sunk deep in the
cushions of an easy chair. is face was calm, with relaed aw and eyes
that seemed vacant. But each time he would rouse himself from the chair
to pencil new notations on the pads of paper that littered his desk. New
ideas, new approaches.

The triple televisor was completed ecept for one thing.

Sound isnt so easy, said Russ. If we could only find a way to
transmit it as well as light.

isten, said Greg, why dont you try a condenser speaker.

A condenser speaker?

Sure, the gadget developed way back in the s. It hasnt been used
for years to my knowledge, but it might do the trick.

Russ grinned broadly. ell, why didnt I think of that? ere Ive been
racking my brain for a new approach, a new wrinkle ... and eactly what
I wanted was at hand.

Should work, declared Greg. ust the opposite of a condenser
microphone. Instead of radiating sound waves mechanically, it radiates a
changing electric field and this field becomes audible directly within
the ear. ven yet no one seems to understand ust how it works, but it
does ... and thats good enough.

I know, said Russ. It really makes no sound. In other words it
creates an electric field that doubles for sound. It ought to be ust
the thing because nothing can stop it. Metal shielding can, I guess, if
its thick enough, but its got to be pretty damn thick.

It took time to set the mechanism up. Ready, the massive apparatus,
within which glowed a larger and more powerful force field, was operated
by two monstrous material energy engines. The controls were euipped
with clockwork drives, designed so that the motion of the arth could be
nullified completely and automatically for work upon outlying planets.

                                   

Russ stood back and looked at it. Stand in front of that screen, Greg,
he said, and well try it on you.

Greg stepped in front of the screen. The purr of power came on.
Suddenly, materializing out of the air, came Gregs proection. azy and
undefined at first, it rapidly assumed apparent solidity. Greg waved his
arm the image moved its arm.

Russ left the controls and walked across the laboratory to inspect the
image. amined from all sides, it looked solid. Russ walked through
it and felt nothing. There was nothing there. It was ust a
threedimensional image. But even from two feet away, it was as if the
man himself stood there in all the actuality of flesh and blood.

ello, Russ, the image whispered. It held out a hand. Glad to see you
again.

aughing, Russ thrust out his hand. It closed on nothing in midair, but
the two men appeared to shake hands.

They tested the machine that afternoon. Their images strode above the
trees, apparently walking on thin air. Gigantic replicas of Greg stood
on a faraway mountain top and shouted with a thunderous voice. Smaller
images, no more than two inches high, shinnied up a table leg.

Satisfied, they shut off the machine.

Thats one of the possibilities you mentioned, suggested Russ.

Greg nodded grimly.

                                   

An autumn gale pelted the windows with driving rain, and a wild, wet
wind howled through the pines outside. The fire was leaping and flaring
in the fireplace.

eep in his chair, Russ stared into the flame and puffed at his pipe.

The factory wants more money on the spaceship, said Greg from the
other chair. I had to put up some more shares as collateral on a new
loan.

Market still going down? asked Russ.

Not the market, replied Greg. My stocks. All of them hit new lows
today.

Russ dragged at the pipe thoughtfully. Ive been thinking about that
stock business, Greg.

So have I, but it doesnt seem to do much good.

ook, said Russ slowly, what planets have echanges?

All of them ecept Mercury. The ovian echange is at Ranthoor. Theres
even one out at luto. ust mining and chemical shares listed, though.

Russ did not reply. Smoke curled up from his pipe. e was staring into
the fire.

Why do you ask? Greg wanted to know.

ust something stirring around in my mind. I was wondering where
Chambers does most of his trading.

Ranthoor now, said Greg. sed to do it on enus. The listing is
larger there. But since he took over the ovian confederacy, he switched
his business to it. The transaction ta is lower. e saw to that.

And the same shares are listed on the Callisto market as on the New
ork boards?

Naturally, said Greg, only not as many.

Russ watched the smoke from his pipe. ow long does it take light to
travel from Callisto to arth?

Why, about  minutes, I guess. Somewhere around there. Greg sat
upright. Say, whats light got to do with this?

A lot, said Russ. All commerce is based on the assumption that light
is instantaneous, but it isnt. All business, anywhere throughout the
Solar System, is based on Greenwich time. When a noon signal sent out
from arth reaches Mars, its noon there, but as a matter of fact, it is
actually  minutes or so past noon. When the same signal reaches
Callisto, the correct time for the chronometer used in commerce would be
noon when it is really a uarter to one. That system simplifies things.
oes away with varying times. And it has worked all right so far because
there has been, up to now, nothing that could go faster than light. No
news can travel through space, no message, no signal can be sent at any
speed greater than that. So everything has been fine.

Greg had come out of the chair, was standing on his feet, the glow of
the blaze throwing his athletic figure into bold relief. That calm
eterior had been stripped from him now. e was ecited.

I see what you are getting at We have something that is almost
instantaneous

Almost, said Russ. Not uite. Theres a time lag somewhere. But it
isnt noticeable ecept over vast distances.

But it would beat ordinary light signals to Callisto. It would beat
them there by almost  minutes.

Almost, Russ agreed. Maybe a split second less.

Greg strode up and down in front of the fireplace like a caged lion. By
heaven, he said, weve got Chambers where we want him. We can beat the
stock uotations to Callisto. With that advance knowledge of what the
board is doing in New ork, we can make back every dime Ive lost. We
can take Mr. Chambers to the cleaners

Russ grinned. actly, he said. Well know  minutes in advance of
the other traders what the market will be. ets see Chambers beat
that.




CATR SN


Ben Wrail was taking things easy. Stretched out in his chair, with his
cigar lit and burning satisfactorily, he listened to a radio program
broadcast from arth.

Through the window beside him, he could look out of his skyscraper
apartment over the domed city of Ranthoor. ooming in the sky, slightly
distorted by the heavy uartz of the distant dome, was massive upiter,
a scarlet ball tinged with orange and yellow. verwhelmingly luminous,
monstrously large, it filled a large portion of the visible sky, a sight
that brought millions of tourists to the ovian moons each year, a sight
that even the oldtimers still must stare at, drawn by some unfathomable
fascination.

Ben Wrail stared at it now, puffing at his cigar, listening to the
radio. An aweinspiring thing, a looming planet that seemed almost ready
to topple and crash upon this airless, frigid world.

Wrail was an oldtimer. For thirty yearsarth yearshe had made his
home in Ranthoor. e had seen the city grow from a dinky little mining
camp enclosed by a small dome to one that boasted half a million
population. The dome that now covered the city was the fourth one. Four
times, like the nautilus, the city had outgrown its shell, until today
it was the greatest domed city in the Solar System. Where life had once
been cheap and where the scum of the system had held rendezvous, he had
seen Ranthoor grow into a city of dignity, capital of the ovian
confederacy.

e had helped build that confederacy, had been elected a member of the
constitution commission, had helped create the government and for over a
decade had helped to make its laws.

But now ... Ben Wrail spat angrily and stuffed the cigar back in his
mouth again, taking a fresh and fearsome grip. Now everything had
changed. The ovian worlds today were held in bond by Spencer Chambers.
The government was in the hands of his henchmen. uly elected, of
course, but in an election held under the unspoken threat that
Interplanetary ower would withdraw, leaving the moons circling the
great planet without heat, air, energy. For the worlds of the ovian
confederacy, every single one of them, depended for their life upon the
accumulators freighted outward from the Sun.

Talk of revolt was in the air, but, lacking a leader, it would get
nowhere. ohn Moore Mallory was imprisoned on one of the prison
spaceships that plied through the Solar System. Mallory, months ago, had
been secretly transferred from the Callisto prison to the spaceship, but
in a weeks time the secret had been spread in angry whispers. If there
had been riots and bloodshed, they would have been to no purpose. For
revolution, even if successful, would gain nothing. It would merely goad
Interplanetary ower into withdrawing, refusing to service the domed
cities on the moons.

                                   

Ben Wrail stirred restlessly in his chair. The cigar had gone out. The
radio program blared unheard. is eyes still looked out the window
without seeing upiter.

amn, said Ben Wrail. Why did he have to go and spoil an evening
thinking about this damned political situation? espite his part in the
building of the confederacy, he was a businessman, not a politician.
Still, it hurt to see something torn down that he had helped to build,
though he knew that every pioneering strike in history had been taken
over by shrewd, ruthless, powerful operators. nowing that should have
helped, but it didnt. e and the other ovian pioneers had hoped it
wouldnt happen and, of course, it had.

Ben Wrail, said a voice in the room.

Wrail swung around, away from the window.

Manning he yelled, and the man in the center of the room grinned
bleakly at him. ow did you come in without me hearing you? When did
you get here?

Im not here, said Greg. Im back on arth.

oure what? asked Wrail blankly. Thats a pretty silly statement,
isnt it, Manning? r did you decide to loosen up and pull a gag now and
then?

I mean it, said Manning. This is ust an image of me. My body is back
on arth.

ou mean youre dead? oure a ghost?

The grin widened, but the face was bleak as ever.

No, Ben, Im ust alive as you are. et me eplain. This is a
television image of me. Threedimensional television. I can travel
anywhere like this.

Wrail sat down in the chair again. I dont suppose thered be any use
trying to shake hands with you.

No use, agreed Mannings image. There isnt any hand.

Nor asking you to have a chair?

Manning shook his head.

Anyhow, said Wrail, Im damn glad to see youor think I see you. I
dont know which. Figure you can stay and talk with me a while?

                                   

Certainly, said Manning. That is what I came for. I want to ask your
help.

isten, declared Wrail, you cant be on arth, Manning. I say
something to you and you answer right back. That isnt possible. ou
cant hear anything I say until  minutes after I say it, and then Id
have to wait another  minutes to hear your answer.

Thats right, agreed the image, if you insist upon talking about the
velocity of light. We have something better than that.

We?

Russell age and myself. We have a twoway television apparatus that
works almost instantaneously. To all purposes, so far as the distance
between arth and Callisto is concerned, it is instantaneous.

Wrails aw fell. Well, I be damned. What have you two fellows been up
to now?

A lot, said Manning laconically. For one thing we are out to bust
Interplanetary ower. Bust them wide open. ear that, Wrail?

Wrail stared in stupefaction. Sure, I hear. But I cant believe it.

All right then, said Manning grimly, well give you proof. What
could you do, Ben, if we told you what was happening on the stock market
in New ork ... without you having to wait the  minutes it takes the
uotations to get here?

Wrail sprang to his feet. What could I do? Why, I could run the pants
off every trader in the echange I could make a billion a minute e
stopped and looked at the image. But this isnt like you. This isnt
the way youd do things.

I dont want you to hurt anyone but Chambers, said Manning. If
somebody else gets in the way, of course they have to take the rap along
with him. But I do want to give Chambers a licking. Thats what I came
here to see you about.

By eaven, Greg, Ill do it, said Wrail. e stepped uickly forward,
held out his hand to close the deal, and encountered only air.

Mannings image threw back its head and laughed.

Thats your proof, Ben. Good enough?

Ill say it is, said Wrail shakily, looking down at the solidseeming
hand that his own had gone right through.

                                   

November , , was a day long remembered in financial circles
throughout the Solar System. The Ranthoor market opened easy with little
activity. Then a few stocks made fractional gains. Mining dropped
fractionally. Martian Irrigation still was uneplainably low, as was
luto Chemical and Asteroid Mining.

Trading through two brokers, Ben Wrail bought , shares of enus
Farms, Inc. when the market opened at . A few minutes later they
bought , shares of Spacesuits td. at . The farm stocks
dropped off a point. Spacesuits gained a point. Then suddenly both rose.
In the second hour of trading the enus stocks had boomed a full five
points and Wrail sold. Ten minutes later they sagged. At the end of the
day they were off two points from the opening. In late afternoon Wrail
threw his , shares of Spacesuits on the market, sold them at an
even . Before the close they had dropped back with a gain of only
half a point over the opening.

Those were only two transactions. There were others. Spaceship
Fabrication climbed three points before it fell and Wrail cashed in on
that. Mercury Metals rose two points and crashed back to close with a
full point loss. Wrail sold ust before the break. e had realized a
cool half million in the days trade.

The net day it was a million and then the man who had always been a
safe trader, who had always played the conservative side of the market,
apparently sure of his ground now, plunged deeper and deeper. It was
uncanny. Wrail knew when to buy and when to sell. ther traders watched
closely, followed his lead. e threw them off by using different brokers
to disguise his transactions.

ectic day followed hectic day. Ben Wrail did not appear on the floor.
Calls to his office netted eactly nothing. Mr. Wrail was not in. So
sorry.

is brokers, well paid, were closemouthed. They bought and sold. That
was all.

Seated in his office, Ben Wrail was busy watching two television screens
before him. ne showed the board in the New ork echange. In the other
was the image of Gregory Manning, hunched in a chair in ages mountain
laboratory back on arth. And before Greg likewise were two screens, one
showing the New ork echange board, the other trained on Ben Wrails
office.

That Tourist stuff looks good, said Greg. Why not buy a block of it?
I happen to know that Chambers owns a few shares. ell be dabbling in
it.

Ben Wrail grinned. Its made a couple of points, hasnt it? Its
selling here for  right now. In  minutes itll be uoted at .

e picked up a telephone. Buy all you can of Tourist, he said. Right
away. Ill tell you when to sell. Get rid of whatever you have in Titan
Copper at .

Better let go of your holdings of Ranthoor ome, suggested Greg. Its
beginning to slip.

Ill watch it, promised Ben. It may revive.

They lapsed into silence, watching the board in New ork.

ou know, Greg, said Ben finally, I really didnt believe all this
was true until I saw those credit certificates materialize on my desk.

Simple, grunted Greg. This thing weve got can take anything any
place. I could reach out there, grab you up and have you down here in a
split second.

Ben sucked his breath in between his teeth. Im not doubting anything
any more. ou sent me half a billion two days ago. Its more than
doubled now.

e picked up the phone again and spoke to his broker on the other end.

nload Ranthoor ome when she reaches .

                                   

The real furor came on the Ranthoor floor when Wrail cornered Titan
Copper. Striking swiftly, he purchased the stock in huge blocks. The
shares rocketed as the echanges throughout the System were thrown into
an uproar. nder the cover of the ecitement he proceeded to corner
Spacesuits td. Spacesuits zoomed.

For two days the main echanges on four worlds were in a frenzy as
traders watched the shares climb swiftly. perators representing
Interplanetary ower made offerings. No takers were reported. The shares
climbed.

Within one hour, however, the entire Wrail holdings in both stocks were
dumped on the market. The Interplanetary ower traders, frantic over the
prospect of losing control of the two important issues, bought heavily.
The price plummeted.

Spencer Chambers lost three billion or more on the deal. vernight Ben
Wrail had become a billionaire many times over. Greg Manning added to
his own fortune.

We have enough, said Greg. Weve given Chambers what he had coming to
him. ets call it off.

Glad to, agreed Ben. It was ust too damned easy.

Be seeing you, Ben.

Ill get down to arth some day. Come see me when you have a minute.
rop in for an evening.

Thats an invitation, said Greg. Its easy with this threedimension
stuff.

e reached out a hand, snapped a control. The screens in Wrails office
went dead.

Wrail reached for a cigar, lit it carefully. e leaned back in his
chair, put his feet on the desk.

By eaven, he said satisfiedly, Ive never enoyed anything so much
in all my life.




CATR IGT


A giant cylindrical hull of finest beryl steel, the ship loomed in the
screen. A mighty ship, braced into absolute rigidity by monster cross
beams of shining steel. Glowing under the blazing lamps that lighted the
scene, it towered into the shadows of the factory, dwarfing the
scurrying workmen who swarmed over it.

Shes a beauty, said Russ, puffing at his pipe.

Greg nodded agreement. Theyre working on her day and night to get her
finished. We may need it some day and need it in a hurry. If Chambers
really gets that machine of his to rolling, space will be the only place
big enough to hide in.

e chuckled, a grim chuckle, deep in his throat.

But we wont have to hide long. ust until we get organized and then
will come the time when well call for the showdown. Chambers will have
to spread his cards.

Russ snapped the television switch and the screen went blank. The
laboratory suddenly was a place of ueer lights and shadows, bulging
with grotesue machines, with sprawling apparatus, a place that hinted
darkly of vast power and mighty forces.

The scientist sat up in his chair. Weve come a long way, Greg. A long,
long way. We have the greatest power man has ever known we have an
almost incomprehensible space drive we have threedimensional
television.

And, said Greg dryly, we took Chambers to the cleaners on the
market.

They sat in silence. Greg smelled the smoke from Russs pipe, mied with
the taint of lubricant and the faint lingering scent of ionized air.

We mustnt underrate Chambers, however, he declared. The man made one
mistake. e underrated us. We cant repeat his mistake. e is dangerous
all the time. e will stop at nothing. Not even murder.

es going easy now, said Russ. es hoping Craven can find something
that will either eual our stuff or beat it. But Craven isnt having any
luck. es still driving himself on the radiation theory, but he doesnt
seem to make much headway.

If he got it, ust what would it mean?

lenty. With that he could turn all radiations in space to work. The
cosmics, heat, light, everything. Space is full of radiation.

If it hadnt been for Wilson, Greg said, his voice a snarl, we
wouldnt have to be worrying about Chambers. Chambers wouldnt know
until we were ready to let him know.

Wilson eaculated Russ, suddenly leaning forward. I had forgotten
about Wilson. What do you say we try to find him?

                                   

arry Wilson sat at his table in the Martian Club and watched the eotic
Martian dance, performed by nearnude girls. Smoke trailed up lazily
from his drooping cigarette as he watched through suinted eyes. There
was something about the dance that got under Wilsons skin.

The music rose, then fell to whispering undertones and suddenly,
unepectedly, crashed and stopped. The girls were running from the
floor. A wave of smooth, polite applause rippled around the tables.

Wilson sighed and reached for his wine glass. e crushed the cigarette
into a tray and sipped his wine. e glanced around the room, scanning
the bobbing, painted faces of the nightthe great, the neargreat, the
nearenoughtotouchthegreat. Brokers and businessmen, artists and
writers and actors. There were others, too, ueer nightlife shadows
that no one knew much about, or that one heard too much about ... the
playboys and the ladies of family and fortune, correctly attired men,
gorgeously, sleekly attired women.

Andarry Wilson. The waiters called him Mr. Wilson. e heard people
whispering about him asking who he was. is soul soaked it in and cried
for more. Good food, good drinks, the pastels of the walls, the soft
lights and weird, eotic music. The cold but colorful correctness of it
all.

ust two months ago he had stood outside the club, a stranger in the
city, a mechanic from a little outoftheway laboratory, a man who was
paid a pittance for his skill. e had stood outside and watched his
employers walk up the steps and through the magic doors. e had watched
in bitterness....

But now

The orchestra was striking up a tune. A blonde nodded at him from a
nearby table. Solemnly, with the buzz of wine in his brain and its
hotness in his blood, he returned the nod.

Someone was speaking to him, calling him by name. e looked around, but
there was no one looking at him now. And once again, through that flow
of music, through the hum of conversation, through the buzzing of his
own brain, came the voice, cold and sharp as steel

arry Wilson

It sent a shudder through him. e reached for the wine glass again, but
his hand stopped halfway to the stem, paused and trembled at what he
saw.

                                   

For there was a gray vagueness in front of him, a sort of shimmer of
nothingness, and out of that shimmer materialized a pencil.

As he watched, in stricken terror, the point of the pencil dropped to
the tablecloth and slowly, precisely, it started to move. e stared,
hypnotized, unbelieving, with the fingers of madness probing at his
brain. The pencil wrote

    Wilson, you sold me out.

The man at the table tried to speak, tried to shriek, but his tongue and
throat were dry and only harsh breath rattled in his mouth.

The pencil moved on mercilessly

    But you will pay. No matter where you go, I will find you. ou
    cannot hide from me.

The pencil slowly lifted its point from the table and suddenly was gone,
as if it had never been. Wilson, eyes wide and filled with terrible
fear, stared at the black words on the cloth.

    Wilson, you sold me out. But you will pay. No matter where you go, I
    will find you. ou cannot hide from me.

The music pulsated in the room, the hum of conversation ran like an
undertone, but Wilson did not hear. is entire consciousness was
centered on the writing, the letters and the words that filled his soul
with dread.

Something seemed to snap within him. The cold wind of terror reached out
and struck at him. e staggered from the chair. is hand swept the wine
glass from the table and it shattered into chiming shards.

They cant do this to me he shrieked.

There was a silence in the room a silence of terrible accusation.
veryone was staring at him. yebrows raised.

                                   

A waiter was at his elbow. o you feel ill, sir?

And then, on unsteady feet, he was being led away. Behind him he heard
the music once again, heard the rising hum of voices.

Someone set his hat on his head, was holding his coat. The cold air of
the night struck his face and the doors sighed closed behind him.

Id take it easy going down the step, sir, counseled the doorman.

An aerotai driver held open the door of the cab and saluted.

Where to, sir?

Wilson stumbled in and stammered out his address. The tai droned into
the traffic lane.

ands twitching, Wilson fumbled with the key, took minutes to open the
door into his apartment. Finally the lock clicked and he pushed open the
door. is uesting finger found the wall switch. ight flooded the room.

Wilson heaved a sigh of relief. e felt safe here. This place belonged
to him. It was his home, his retreat....

A low laugh, hardly more than a chuckle, sounded behind him. e whirled
and for a moment, blinking in the light, he saw nothing. Then something
stirred by one of the windows, gray and vague, like a sheet of moving
fog.

As he watched, shrinking back against the wall, the grayness deepened,
took the form of a man. And out of that mistiness a face was etched, a
face that had no single line of humor in it, a bleak face with the fire
of anger in the eyes.

Manning shrieked Wilson. Manning e wheeled and sprinted for the
door, but the gray figure moved, too ... incredibly fast, as if it were
windblown vapor, and barred his path to the door.

Why are you running away? Mannings voice mocked. Certainly you
arent afraid of me.

ook, Wilson whimpered, I didnt think of what it meant. I ust was
tired of working the way age made me work. Tired of the little salary I
got. I wanted money. I was hungry for money.

So you sold us out, said Manning.

No, cried Wilson, I didnt think of it that way. I didnt stop to
think.

Think now, then, said Manning gravely. Think of this. No matter where
you are, no matter where you go, no matter what you do, Ill always be
watching you, Ill never let you rest. Ill never give you a minutes
peace.

lease, pleaded Wilson. lease, go away and leave me. Ill give you
back the money ... theres some of it left.

ou sold out for twenty thousand, said Manning. ou could have gotten
twenty million. Chambers would have paid that much to know what you
could tell him, because it was worth twenty billion.

Wilsons breath was coming in panting gasps. e dropped his coat and
backed away. The back of his knees collided with a chair and he folded
up, sat down heavily, still staring at the gray mistiness that was a
man.

Think of that, Wilson, Manning went on sneeringly. ou could have
been a millionaire. Maybe even a billionaire. ou could have had all the
fine things these other people have. But you only got twenty thousand.

What can I do? begged Wilson.

The misty face split in a sardonic grin.

I dont believe theres anything left for you to do.

Before Wilsons eyes the face dissolved, lost its lines, seemed to melt
away. nly streaming, swirling mist, then a slight refraction in the air
and then nothing.

Slowly Wilson rose to his feet, reached for the bottle of whiskey on the
table. is hand shook so that the liuor splashed. When he raised the
glass to his mouth, his stillshaking hand poured half the drink over
his white shirt front.




CATR NIN


udwig Stutsman pressed his thin, straight lips together. So thats the
setup, he said.

Across the desk Spencer Chambers studied the man. Stutsman was like a
wolf, lean and cruel and vicious. e even looked like a wolf, with his
long, thin face, his small, beady eyes, the thin, bloodless lips. But he
was the kind of man who didnt always wait for instructions, but went
ahead and used his own udgment. And in a ruthless sort of way, his
udgment was always right.

nly as a last resort, cautioned Chambers, do I want you to use the
etreme measures you are so fond of using. If they should prove
necessary, we can always use them. But not yet. I want to settle this
thing in the uietest way possible. age and Manning are two men who
cant simply disappear. Thered be a hunt, an investigation, an ugly
situation.

I understand, agreed Stutsman. If something should happen to their
notes, if somebody could find them. erhaps you. If you found them on
your desk one morning.

The two men measured one another with their eyes, more like enemies
than men working for the same ends.

Not my desk, snapped Chambers, Cravens. So that Craven could
discover this new energy. Whatever Craven discovers belongs to
Interplanetary.

Chambers rose from his chair and walked to the window, looked out. After
a moments time, he turned and walked back again, sat down in his chair.
eaning back, he matched his fingertips, his teeth flashing in a grin
under his mustache.

I dont know anything about whats going on, he said. I dont even
know someone has discovered material energy. Thats up to Craven. e has
to find it. Both you and Craven work alone. I know nothing about either
of you.

Stutsmans aw closed like a steel trap. Ive always worked alone.

By the way, said Chambers, the edge suddenly off his voice, how are
things going in the ovian confederacy? I trust you left everything in
good shape.

As good as could be epected, Stutsman replied. The people are still
uneasy, half angry. They still remember Mallory.

But Mallory, obected Chambers, is on a prison ship. In near Mercury
now, I believe.

Stutsman shook his head. They still remember him. Well have trouble
out there one of these days.

I would hate to have that happen, remarked Chambers softly. I would
regret it very much. I sent you out there to see that nothing happened.

The trouble out there wont be a flash to this thing you were telling
me about, snapped Stutsman.

Im leaving that in your hands, too, Chambers told him. I know you
can take care of it.

Stutsman rose. I can take care of it.

Im sure you can, Chambers said.

e remained standing after Stutsman left, looking at the door through
which the man had gone. Maybe it had been a mistake to call Stutsman in
from Callisto. Maybe it was a mistake to use Stutsman at all. e didnt
like a lot of things the man did ... or the way he did them. Brutal
things.

                                   

Slowly Chambers sat down again and his face grew hard.

e had built an empire of many worlds. That couldnt be done with gentle
methods and no sure goal. Fighting every inch from planet to planet, he
had used power to gain power. And now that empire was threatened by two
men who had found a greater power. That threat had to be smashed It
would be smashed

Chambers leaned forward and pressed a buzzer.

es, Mr. Chambers? said a voice in the communicator.

Send r. Craven in, commanded Chambers.

Craven came in, slouchily, his hair standing on end, his eyes peering
through the thicklensed glasses.

ou sent for me, he growled, taking a chair.

es, I did, said Chambers. ave a drink?

No. And no smoke either.

Chambers took a long cigar from the bo on his desk, clipped off the end
and rolled it in his mouth.

                                   

Im a busy man, Craven reminded him.

uckering lines of amusement wrinkled Chambers eyes as he lit up,
watching Craven.

ou do seem to be busy, octor, he said. I only wish you had
something concrete to report.

The scientist bristled. I may have in a few days, if you leave me alone
and let me work.

I presume that you are still working on your radiation collector. Any
progress?

Not too much. ou cant epect a man to turn out discoveries to order.
Im working almost night and day now. If the thing can be solved, Ill
solve it.

Chambers glowed. eep up the good work. But I wanted to talk to you
about something else. ou heard, I suppose, that I lost a barrel of
money on the Ranthoor echange.

Craven smiled, a sardonic twisting of his lips. I heard something about
it.

I thought you had, said Chambers sourly. If not, you would have been
the only one who hadnt heard how Ben Wrail took Chambers for a ride.

e really took you then, commented Craven. I thought maybe it was
ust one of those stories.

e took me, but thats not whats worrying me. I want to know how he
did it. No man, not even the most astute student of the market, could
have foretold the trend of the market the way he did. And Wrail isnt
the most astute. It isnt natural when a man who has always played the
safe side suddenly turns the market upside down. ven less natural when
he never makes a mistake.

Well, demanded Craven, what do you want me to do about it? Im a
scientist. Ive never owned a share of stock in my life.

Theres an angle to it that might interest you, said Chambers
smoothly, leaning back, puffing at the cigar. Wrail is a close friend
of Manning. And Wrail himself didnt have the money it took to swing
those deals. Somebody furnished that money.

Manning? asked Craven.

What do you think?

If Mannings mied up in it, said Craven acidly, there isnt anything
any of us can do about it. oure bucking money and genius together.
This Manning is no slouch of a scientist himself and age is better.
Theyre a combination.

                                   

ou think theyre good? asked Chambers.

Good? idnt they discover material energy? The scientist glowered at
his employer. That ought to be answer enough.

es, I know, Chambers agreed irritably. But can you tell me how they
worked this market deal?

Craven grimaced. I can guess. Those boys didnt stop with ust finding
how to harness material energy. They probably have more things than you
can even suspect. They were working with force fields, you remember,
when they stumbled onto the energy. Force fields are something we dont
know much about. A man monkeying around with them is apt to find almost
anything.

What are you getting at?

My guess would be that they have a new kind of television working in
the fourth dimension, using time as a factor. It would penetrate
anything. Nothing could stop it. It could go anywhere, at a speed many
times the speed of light ... almost instantaneously.

Chambers sat upright in his chair. Are you sure about this?

Craven shook his head. ust a guess. I tried to figure out what I would
do if I were age and Manning and had the things they had. Thats all.

And what would you do?

Craven smiled dourly. Id be using that television right in this
office, he said. Id keep you and me under observation all the time.
If what I think is true, Manning is watching us now and has heard every
word we said.

Chambers face was a harsh mask of anger. I dont believe it could be
done

octor Craven is right, said a uiet voice.

Chambers swung around in his chair and gasped. Greg Manning stood inside
the room, ust in front of the desk.

I hope you dont mind, said Greg. Ive been wanting to have a talk
with you.

Craven leaped to his feet, his eyes shining. Three dimensions he
whispered. ow did you do it?

Greg chuckled. I havent patented the idea, octor. Id rather not tell
you ust now.

ou will accept my congratulations, however? asked Craven.

Thats generous of you. I really hadnt epected this much.

I mean it, said Craven. amned if I dont. Chambers was on his feet,
leaning across the desk, with his hand held out. Gregs right hand came
out slowly.

Sorry, I really cant shake hands, he said. Im not here, you know.
ust my image.

Chambers hand dropped to the desk. Stupid of me not to realize that.
ou looked so natural. e sat back in his chair again, brushed his gray
mustache. A smile twisted his lips. So youve been watching me?

ff and on, Greg said.

And what is the occasion of this visit? asked Chambers. ou could
have held a distinct advantage by remaining unseen. I didnt entirely
believe what Craven told me, you know.

That isnt the point at all, declared Greg. Maybe we can get to
understand one another.

So youre ready to talk business.

Not in the sense you mean, Greg said. Im not willing to make
concessions, but theres no reason why we have to fight one another.

Why, no, said Chambers, theres no reason for that. Ill be willing
to buy your discovery.

I wouldnt sell it to you, Greg told him.

ou wouldnt? Why not? Im prepared to pay for it.

oud pay the price, all right. Anything I asked ... even if it
bankrupted you. Then youd mark it down to loss, and scrap material
energy. And Ill tell you why.

                                   

A terrible silence hung in the room as the two men eyed one another
across the table.

ou wouldnt use it, Greg went on, because it would remove the
stranglehold you have on the planets. It would make power too cheap. It
would eliminate the necessity of your rented accumulators. The ovian
moons and Mars could stand on their feet without the power you ship to
them. ou could make billions in legitimate profits selling the
apparatus to manufacture the energy ... but you wouldnt want that. ou
want to be dictator of the Solar System. And that is what I intend to
stop.

isten, Manning, said Chambers, youre a reasonable man. ets talk
this thing over without anger. What do you plan to do?

I could put my material engines on the market, said Greg. That would
ruin you. ou wouldnt move an accumulator after that. our
Interplanetary stock wouldnt be worth the paper it is written on.
Material energy would wipe you out.

ou forget I have franchises on those planets, Chambers reminded him.
Id fight you in the courts until hell froze over.

Id prove convenience, economy and necessity. Any court in any land, on
any planet, would rule for me.

Chambers shook his head. Not Martian or ovian courts. Id tell them to
rule for me and the courts outside of arth do what I tell them to.

                                   

Greg straightened and backed from the desk. I hate to ruin a man.
ouve worked hard. ouve built a great company. I would be willing, in
return for a handsoff policy on your part, to hold up any announcement
of my material energy until you had time to get out, to save what you
could.

ard fury masked Chambers face. oull never build a material energy
engine outside your laboratory. ont worry about ruining me. I wont
allow you to stand in my way. I hope you understand.

I understand too well. But even if you are a dictator out on Mars and
enus, even if you do own Mercury and boss the ovian confederacy,
youre ust a man to me. A man who stands for things that I dont like.

Greg stopped and his eyes were like ice crystals.

ou talked to Stutsman today, he said. If I were you, I wouldnt let
Stutsman do anything rash. Russ age and I might have to fight back.

Mockery tinged Chambers voice. Am I to take this as a declaration of
war, Mr. Manning?

Take it any way you like, Greg said. I came here to give you a
proposition, and you tell me youre going to smash me. All I have to say
to you, Chambers, is thiswhen you get ready to smash me, youd better
have a deep, dark hole all picked out for yourself to hide in. Because
Ill hand you back ust double anything you hand out.




CATR TN


ne of us will have to watch all the time, Greg told Russ. We cant
take any chances. Stutsman will try to reach us sooner or later and we
have to be ready for him.

e glanced at the new radar screen they had set up that morning beside
the bank of other controls. Any ship coming within a hundred miles of
the laboratory would be detected instantly and pinpointed.

The board flashed now. In the screen they saw a huge passenger ship
spearing down toward the airport south of them.

With the port that close, said Russ, well get a lot of signals.

I ordered the Belgium factory to rush work on the ship, said Greg.
But it will be a couple of weeks yet. We ust have to sit tight and
wait. As soon as we have the ship well start in on Chambers but until
we get the ship, we ust have to dig in and stay on the defensive.

e studied the scene in the screen. The ship had leveled off, was
banking in to the port. is eyes turned away, took in the laboratory
with its crowding mass of machinery.

We dont want to fool ourselves about Chambers, he said. e may not
have the power here on arth that he does on the other planets, but hes
got plenty. Feeling the way he does, hell try to finish us off in a
hurry now.

Russ reached out to the table that stood beside the bank of controls and
picked up a small, complicated mechanism. Its face bore nine dials, with
the needles on three of them apparently registering, the other si
motionless.

What is that? asked Greg.

A mechanical detective, said Russ. A sort of mechanical shadow. While
you were busy with the stock market stunt, I made several of them. ne
for Wilson and another for Chambers and still another for Craven. e
hoisted and lowered the one in his hand. This one is for Stutsman.

A shadow? asked Greg. o you mean that thing will trail Stutsman?

Not only trail him, said Russ. It will find him, wherever he may be.
Some obect every person wears or carries is made of iron or some other
magnetic metal. This shadow contains a tiny bit of that ridiculous
military decoration that Stutsman never allows far away from him. Find
that decoration and you find Stutsman. In another one I have a chunk of
Wilsons belt buckle, that college buckle, you know, that hes so proud
of. Chambers has a ring made of a piece of meteoric iron and thats the
bait for another machine. ave a tiny piece off Cravens spectacles in
his machine. It was easy to get the stuff. The force field enables a man
to reach out and take anything he wants to, from a massive machine to a
microscopic bit of matter. It was a cinch to get the stuff I needed.

Russ chuckled and put the machine back on the table. e gestured toward
it.

It maintains a tiny field similar to our television field, he
eplained. But its modified along a special derivation with a magnetic
result. It can follow and find the original mass of any metallic
substance it may contain.

Clever, commented Greg.

Russ lit his pipe, puffed comfortably. We needed something like that.

The red light on the board snapped on and blinked. Russ reached out and
slammed home the lever, twirled dials. It was only another passenger
ship. They relaed, but not too much.

                                   

I wonder what hes up to, said Russ.

Stutsmans car had stopped in the dock section of New ork. Crumbling,
rotting piers and old tumbledown warehouses, deserted and unused since
the last ship sailed the ocean before giving way to air commerce, loomed
darkly, like grim ghosts, in the darkness.

Stutsman had gotten out of the car and said Wait here.

es, sir, said the voice of the driver.

Stutsman strode away, down a dark street. The televisor kept pace with
him and on the screen he could be seen as a darker shape moving among
the shadows of that old, almost forgotten section of the Solar Systems
greatest city.

Another shadow detached itself from the darkness of the street, shuffled
toward Stutsman.

Sir, said a whining voice, I havent eaten ...

There was a swift movement as Stutsmans stick lashed out, a thud as it
connected with the second shadows head. The shadow crumpled on the
pavement. Stutsman strode on.

Greg sucked in his breath. e isnt very sociable tonight.

Stutsman ducked into an alley where even deeper darkness lay. Russ, with
a delicate adustment, slid the televisor along, closer to Stutsman,
determined not to lose sight of him for an instant.

The man suddenly turned into a doorway so black that nothing could be
seen. Sounds of sharp, impatient rappings came out of the screen as
Stutsman struck the door with his stick.

Brilliant illumination sprang out over the doorway, but Stutsman seemed
not to see it, went on knocking. The colors on the screen were
peculiarly distorted.

ltraviolet, grunted Greg. Whoever hes calling on wants to have a
good look before letting anybody in.

The door creaked open and a shaft of normal light spewed out into the
street, turning its murkiness to pallid yellow.

Stutsman stepped inside.

The man at the door erked his head. Back room, he said.

                                   

The televisor slid through the door into the lighted room behind
Stutsman. ust lay thick on the woodwork and floors. atches of plaster
had broken away. Furrows zigzagged across the floor, marking the path of
heavy boes or furniture which had been pushed along in utter disdain of
the flooring. Cheap wallpaper hung in tatters from the walls, streaked
with water from some broken pipe.

But the back room was a startling contrast to the first. Rich,
comfortable furniture filled it. The floor was covered with a
steelcloth rug and steelcloth hangings, colorfully painted, hid the
walls.

A man sat under a lamp, reading a newspaper. e rose to his feet, like
the sudden uncoiling of springs.

Russ gasped. That face was one of the best known faces in the entire
Solar System. A ratlike face, with cruel cunning printed on it that had
been on front pages and T screens often, but never for pay.

Scorio whispered Russ.

Greg nodded and his lips were drawn tight.

Stutsman, said Scorio, surprised. oure the last person in the world
I was epecting. Come in. ave a chair. Make yourself comfortable.

Stutsman snorted. This isnt a social call.

I didnt figure it was, replied the gangster, but sit down anyway.

Gingerly Stutsman sat down on the edge of a chair, hunched forward.
Scorio resumed his seat and waited.

I have a ob for you, Stutsman announced bluntly.

Fine. It isnt often you have one for me. Threefour years ago, wasnt
it?

We may be watched, warned Stutsman.

The mobster started from his chair, his eyes darting about the room.

Stutsman grunted disgustedly. If were watched, there isnt anything we
can do about it.

We cant, huh? snarled the gangster. Why not?

Because the watcher is on the West Coast. We cant reach him. If hes
watching, he can see every move we make, hear every word we say.

Who is it?

                                   

Greg Manning or Russ age, said Stutsman. ouve heard of them?

Sure. I heard of them.

They have a new kind of television, said Stutsman. They can see and
hear everything thats happening on arth, perhaps in all the Solar
System. But I dont think theyre watching us now. Craven has a machine
that can detect their televisor. It registers certain field effects they
use. They werent watching when I left Cravens laboratory ust a few
minutes ago. They may have picked me up since, but I dont think so.

So Craven has made a detector, said Greg calmly. e can tell when
were watching now.

es a clever cuss, agreed Russ.

Take a look at that machine now, urged Scorio. See if theyre
watching. ou shouldnt have come here. ou should have let me know and
I would have met you some place. I cant have people knowing where my
hideout is.

uiet down, snapped Stutsman. I havent got the machine. It weighs
half a ton.

Scorio sank deeper into his chair, worried. o you want to take a
chance and talk business?

Certainly. Thats why Im here. This is the proposition. Manning and
age are working in a laboratory out on the West Coast, in the
mountains. Ill give you the eact location later. They have some papers
we want. We wouldnt mind if something happened to the laboratory. It
might, for eample blow up. But we want the papers first.

                                   

Scorio said nothing. is face was uiet and cunning.

Give me the papers, said Stutsman, and Ill see that you get to any
planet you want to. And Ill give you two hundred thousand in
Interplanetary Credit certificates. Give me proof that the laboratory
blew up or melted down or something else happened to it and Ill boost
the figure to five hundred thousand.

Scorio did not move a muscle as he asked Why dont you have some of
your own mob do this ob?

Because I cant be connected with it in any way, said Stutsman. If
you slip up and something happens, I wont be able to do a thing for
you. Thats why the price is high.

The gangsters eyes slitted. If the papers are worth that much to you,
why wouldnt they be worth as much to me?

They wouldnt be worth a dime to you.

Why not?

Because you couldnt read them, said Stutsman.

I can read, retorted the gangster.

Not the kind of language on those papers. There arent more than two
dozen people in the Solar System who could read it, perhaps a dozen who
could understand it, maybe half a dozen who could follow the directions
in the papers. e leaned forward and abbed a forefinger at the
gangster. And there are only two people in the System who could write
it.

What the hell kind of a language is it that only two dozen people could
read?

It isnt a language, really. Its mathematics.

h, arithmetic.

No, Stutsman said. Mathematics. ou see? ou dont even know the
difference between the two, so what good would the papers do you?

Scorio nodded. eah, youre right.




CATR N


The arisBerlin epress thundered through the night, a gigantic ship
that rode high above the arth. Far below one could see the dim lights
of eastern urope.

arry Wilson pressed his face against the window, staring down. There
was nothing to see but the tiny lights. They were alone, he and the
other occupants of the ship ... alone in the dark world that surrounded
them.

But Wilson sensed some other presence in the ship, someone besides the
pilot and his mechanics up ahead, the hostess and the three stodgy
traveling men who were his fellow passengers.

Wilsons hair ruffled at the base of his skull, tingling with an unknown
fear that left him shaken.

A voice whispered in his ear arry Wilson. So you are running away

ust a tiny voice that seemed hardly a voice at all, it seemed at once
to come from far away and yet from very near. The voice, with an edge of
coldness on it, was one he never would forget.

e cowered in his seat, whimpering.

The voice came again idnt I tell you that you couldnt run away?
That no matter where you went, Id find you?

Go away, Wilson whispered huskily. eave me alone. avent you
hounded me enough?

No, answered the voice, not enough. Not yet. ou sold us out. ou
warned Chambers about our energy and now Chambers is sending men to kill
us. But they wont succeed, Wilson.

ou cant hurt me, said Wilson defiantly. ou cant do anything but
talk to me. oure trying to drive me mad, but you cant. I wont let
you. Im not going to pay any more attention to you.

The whisper chuckled.

ou cant, argued Wilson wildly. All you can do is talk to me. ouve
never done anything but that. ou drove me out of New ork and out of
ondon and now youre driving me out of aris. But Berlin is as far as I
will go. I wont listen to you any more.

Wilson, whispered the voice, look inside your bag. The bag, Wilson,
where you are carrying that money. That stack of credit certificates.
Almost eleven thousand dollars, what is left of the twenty thousand
Chambers paid you.

With a wild cry Wilson clawed at his bag, snapped it open, pawed through
it.

                                   

The credit certificates were gone

ou took my money, he shrieked. ou took everything I had. I havent
got a cent. Nothing ecept a few dollars in my pocket.

ou havent got that either, Wilson, whispered the voice.

There was a sound of ripping cloth as something like a great, powerful
hand flung aside Wilsons coat, tore away the inside pocket. There was a
brief flash of a wallet and a bundle of papers, which vanished.

The hostess was hurrying toward him.

Is there something wrong?

They took ... Wilson began and stopped.

What could he tell her? Could he say that a man half way across the
world had robbed him?

The three traveling men were looking at him.

Im sorry, miss, he stammered. I really am. I fell asleep and
dreamed.

e sat down again, shaken. Shivering, he huddled back into the corner of
his seat. is hands eplored the torn coat pocket. e was stranded, high
in the air, somewhere between aris and Berlin ... stranded without
money, without a passport, with nothing but the clothes he wore and the
few personal effects in his bag.

Fighting to calm himself, he tried to reason out his plight. The plane
was entering the Central uropean Federation and that, definitely, was
no place to be without a passport or without visible means of support. A
thousand possibilities flashed through his mind. They might think he was
a spy. e might be cited for illegal entry. e might be framed by secret
police.

Terror perched on his shoulder and whispered to him. e shivered
violently and drew farther back into the corner of the seat. e clasped
his hands, beat them against his huddled knees.

e would cable friends back in America and have them identify him and
vouch for his character. e would borrow some money from them, ust
enough to get back to America. But whom would he cable? And with aching
bitterness in his breast, arry Wilson came face to face with the
horrible realization that nowhere in the world, nowhere in the Solar
System, was there a single person who was his friend. There was no one
to help him.

e bowed his head in his hands and sobbed, his shoulders erking
spasmodically, the sobs racking his body.

The traveling men stared at him unable to understand. The hostess looked
briskly helpless. Wilson knew he looked like a scared fool and he didnt
care.

e was scared.

                                   

Gregory Manning riffled the sheaf of credit certificates, the wallet,
the passport and pile of other papers that lay upon the desk in front of
him.

That closes one little incident, he said grimly. That takes care of
our friend Wilson.

Maybe you were a bit too harsh with him, Greg, suggested Russell age.

Greg shook his head. e was a traitor, the lowest thing alive. e sold
the confidence we placed in him. e traded something that was not his to
trade. e did it for money and now Ive taken that money from him.

e shoved the pile of certificates to one side.

Now Ive got this stuff, he said, I dont know what to do with it. We
dont want to keep it.

Why not send it to Chambers? suggested Russ. e will find the
passport and the money on his desk in the morning. Give him something to
think about tomorrow.




CATR TW


Scorio snarled at the four men I want you to get the thing done right.
I dont want bungling. nderstand?

The bulky, flatfaced man with the scar across his cheek shuffled
uneasily. We went over it a dozen times. We know ust what to do.

e grinned at Scorio, but the grin was lopsided, more like a sneering
grimace. At one time the man had failed to sidestep a heat ray and it
had left a neat red line drawn across the right cheek, nipped the end of
the ear.

All right, ete, said Scorio, glaring at the man, your ob is the
heavy work, so ust keep your mind on it. ouve got the two heaters and
the kit.

ete grinned lopsidedly again. eah, my own kit. I can open anything
hollow with this rig.

ou got a real ob tonight, snarled Scorio. Two doors and a safe.
Sure you can do it?

ust leave it to me, ete growled.

Chizzy, youre to pilot, Scorio snapped. now the coordinates?

Sure, said Chizzy, know them by heart. o it with my eyes shut.

eep your eyes open. We cant have anything go wrong. This is too
important. ou swoop in at top speed and land on the roof. Stand by the
controls and keep a hand on the big heater ust in case of trouble.
ete, Ma and Reg will go to the lockdoor. Reg will stay there with the
buzzer and three drums of ammunition.

e whirled on Reg. ou got that ammunition?

Reg nodded emphatically. Four drums of it, he said. ne solid round
in the gun. Another drum of solid and two eplosive.

Theres a thousand rounds in each drum, snapped Scorio, but they last
only a minute, so do your firing in bursts.

I aint handled buzzers all these years without knowing something about
them.

Theres only two men there, said Scorio, and theyll probably be
asleep. Come down with your motor dead. The lab roof is thick and the
plane landing on those thick tires wont wake them. But be on your guard
all the time. ete and Ma will go through the lockdoor into the
laboratory and open the safe. ump all the papers and money and whatever
else you find into the bags and then get out fast. op into the plane
and take off. When youre clear of the building, turn the heaters on it.
I want it melted down and the men and stuff inside with it. ont leave
even a button unmelted. Get it?

                                   

Sure, chief, said ete. e dusted his hands together.

Now get going. Beat it.

The four men turned and filed out of the room, through the door leading
to the tumbledown warehouse where was hidden the streamlined metal ship.
Swiftly they entered it and the ship nosed gently upward, blasting out
through a broken, frameless skylight, climbing up and up, over the
gleaming spires of New ork.

Back in the room hung with steelcloth curtains, alone, Scorio lit a
cigarette and chuckled. They wont have a chance, he said.

Who wont? asked a tiny voice from almost in front of him.

Why, Manning and age ... said Scorio, and then stopped. The fire of
the match burned down and scorched his fingers. e dropped it. Who
asked that? he roared.

I did, said the piping voice.

Scorio looked down. A threeinch man sat on a matchbo on the desk

Who are you? the gangster shouted.

Im Manning, said the little man. The one youre going to kill. ont
you remember?

amn you shrieked Scorio. is hand flipped open a drawer and pulled
out a flame pistol. The muzzle of the pistol came up and blasted.
Screwed down to its smallest diameter, the guns aim was deadly. A
straight lance of flame, no bigger than a pencil, streamed out, engulfed
the little man, bored into the table top. The bo of matches eploded
with a gush of red that was a dull flash against the blue blaze of the
gun.

But the figure of the man stood within the flame Stood there and
waved an arm at Scorio. The piping voice came out of the heart of the
guns breath.

Maybe Id better get a bit smaller. Make me harder to hit. More sport
that way.

                                   

Scorios finger lifted from the trigger. The flame snapped off.
aboriously climbing out of the still smoking furrow left in the oaken
table top was Greg Manning, not more than an inch tall now.

The gangster laid the gun on the table, stepped closer, warily. With the
palm of a mighty hand he swatted viciously at the little figure.

I got you now

But the figure seemed to ooze upright between his fingers, calmly
stepped off his hand onto the table. And now it began to grow. Watching
it, Scorio saw it grow to si inches and there it stopped.

What are you? he breathed.

I told you, said the little image. Im Gregory Manning. The man you
set out to kill. Ive watched every move youve made and known
everything you planned.

But that isnt possible, protested Scorio. oure out on the West
Coast. This is some trick. Im ust seeing things.

ou arent seeing anything imaginary. Im really here, in this room
with you. I could lift my finger and kill you if I wished ... and maybe
I should.

Scorio stepped back a pace.

But Im not going to, said Manning. I have something better saved for
you. Something more appropriate.

ou cant touch me

ook, said Manning sternly. e pointed his finger at a chair. It
suddenly grew cloudy, became a wisp of trailing smoke, was gone.

The gangster backed away, eyes glued to the spot where the chair had
vanished.

ook here, piped the little voice. Scorio erked his head around and
looked.

The chair was in Mannings hand. A tiny chair, but the very one that had
disappeared from the room a moment before.

Watch out warned Manning, and heaved the chair. The tiny chair
seemed to float in the air. Then with a rush it gathered speed, grew
larger. In a split second it was a fullsized chair and it was hurtling
straight at the gangsters head.

With a strangled cry Scorio threw up his arms. The chair crashed into
him, bowled him over.

Now do you believe me? demanded Manning.

Scrambling to his feet, Scorio gibbered madly, for the siinch figure
was growing. e became as large as the average man, and then much
larger. is head cleared the high ceiling by scant inches. is mighty
hands reached out for the gangster.

Scorio scuttled away on hands and knees, yelping with terror.

owerful hands seemed to seize and lift him. The room was blotted out.
The arth was gone. e was in a place where there was nothing. No light,
no heat, no gravitation. For one searing, blasting second he seemed to
be floating in strangely suspended animation. Then with a olt he became
aware of new surroundings.

e blinked his eyes and looked around. e was in a great laboratory that
hummed faintly with the suggestion of terrific power, that smelled of
ozone and seemed filled with gigantic apparatus.

Two men stood in front of him.

e staggered back.

Manning he gasped.

Manning grinned savagely at him. Sit down, Scorio. ou wont have long
to wait. our boys will be along any minute now.

                                   

Chizzy crouched over the controls, his eyes on the navigation chart.
nly the thin screech of parted air disturbed the silence of the ship.
The high scream and the slow, precise snacksnack of cards as Reg and
Ma played a game of double solitaire with a cold, emotionless
precision.

The plane was near the stratosphere, well off the traveled air lanes. It
was running without lights, but the cabin bulbs were on, carefully
shielded.

ete sat in the copilots chair beside Chizzy. is blank,
epressionless eyes stared straight ahead.

I dont like this ob, he complained.

Why not? asked Chizzy.

age and Manning arent the kind of guys a fellow had ought to be
fooling around with. They aint ust chumps. ou fool with characters
like them and you got trouble.

Chizzy growled at him disgustedly, bent to his controls.

Straight ahead was a thin sliver of a dying Moon that gave barely
enough illumination to make out the great, rugged blocks of the
mountains, like dark, shadowy brushstrokes on a newly started canvas.

ete shuddered. There was something about the thin, watery moonlight,
and those brushstroke hills....

It seems funny up here, he said.

ell, growled Chizzy, youre going soft in your old age.

Silence fell between the two. The snacksnack of the cards continued.

ou aint got nothing to be afraid of, Chizzy told ete. This tub is
the safest place in the world. Shes overpowered a dozen times. She can
outfly anything in the air. Shes rayproof and bulletproof and
bombproof. Nothing can hurt us.

But ete wasnt listening. That moonlight makes a man see things. Funny
things. ike pictures in the night.

oure balmy, declared Chizzy.

ete started out of his seat. is voice gurgled in his throat. e
pointed with a shaking finger out into the night.

ook he yelled ook

Chizzy rose out of his seat ... and froze in sudden terror.

Straight ahead of the ship, etched in silvery moonlines against the
background of the starsprinkled sky, was a grim and terrible face.

It was as big and hard as a mountain.




CATR TIRTN


The ship was silent now. ven the whisper of the cards had stopped. Reg
and Ma were on their feet, startled by the cries of ete and Chizzy.

Its Manning shrieked ete. es watching us

Chizzys hand whipped out like a striking snake toward the controls and,
as he grasped them, his face went deathly white. For the controls were
locked They resisted all the strength he threw against them and the
ship still bore on toward that mocking face that hung above the arth.

o something screamed Ma. ou damn fool, do something

I cant, moaned Chizzy. The ship is out of control.

It seemed impossible. That ship was fast and tricky and it had reserve
power far beyond any possible need. It handled like a dream ... it was
tops in aircraft. But there was no doubt that some force more powerful
than the engines and controls of the ship itself had taken over.

Mannings got us suealed ete. We came out to get him and now he
has us instead

The craft was gaining speed. The whining shriek of the air against its
plates grew thinner and higher. istening, one could almost feel and
hear the sucking of the mighty power that pulled it at an ever greater
pace through the tenuous atmosphere.

The face was gone from the sky now. nly the Moon remained, the Moon and
the brushstroke mountains far below.

Then, suddenly, the speed was slowing and the ship glided downward, down
into the sawteeth of the mountains.

Were falling yelled Ma, and Chizzy growled at him.

But they werent falling. The ship leveled off and floated, suspended
above a sprawling laboratory upon a mountain top.

Thats Mannings laboratory, whispered ete in terrorstricken tones.

The levers yielded unepectedly. Chizzy flung the power control over,
drove the power of the accumulator bank, all the reserve, into the
engines. The ship lurched, but did not move. The engines whined and
screamed in torture. The cabins interior was filled with a blast of
heat, the choking odor of smoke and hot rubber. The heavy girders of the
frame creaked under the mighty forward thrust of the engines ... but the
ship stood still, frozen above that laboratory in the hills.

Chizzy, hauling back the lever, turned around, pale. is hand began
clawing for his heat gun. Then he staggered back. For there were only
two men in the cabin with himReg and Ma. ete had gone

e ust disappeared, Ma abbered. e was standing there in front of
us. Then all at once he seemed to fade, as if he was turning into smoke.
Then he was gone.

                                   

Something had descended about ete. There was no sound, no light, no
heat. e had no sense of weight. It was as if, suddenly, his mind had
become disembodied.

Seeing and hearing and awareness came back to him as one might turn on a
light. From the blackness and the eventless eistence of a split second
before, he was catapulted into a world of light and sound.

It was a world that hummed with power, that was ablaze with light, a
laboratory that seemed crammed with mighty banks of massive machinery,
lighted by great globes of creamy brightness, shedding an illumination
white as sunlight, yet shadowless as the light of a cloudy day.

Two men stood in front of him, looking at him, one with a faint smile on
his lips, the other with lines of fear etched across his face. The
smiling one was Gregory Manning and the one who was afraid was Scorio

With a start, ete snatched his pistol from its holster. The sights came
up and lined on Manning as he pressed the trigger. But the lancing heat
that sprang from the muzzle of the gun never reached Manning. It seemed
to strike an obstruction less than a foot away. It mushroomed with a
flare of scorching radiance that drove needles of agony into the
gangsters body.

is finger released its pressure and the gun dangled limply from his
hand. e moaned with the pain of burns upon his unprotected face and
hands. e beat feebly at tiny, licking blazes that ran along his
clothing.

Manning was still smiling at him.

ou cant reach me, ete, he said. ou can only hurt yourself. oure
enclosed within a solid wall of force that matter cannot penetrate.

A voice came from one corner of the room Ill bring Chizzy down net.

ete whirled around and saw Russell age for the first time. The
scientist sat in front of a great control board, his swift, skillful
fingers playing over the banks of keys, his eyes watching the instrument
and the screen that slanted upward from the control banks.

ete felt dizzy as he stared at the screen. e could see the interior of
the ship he had been yanked from a moment before. e could see his three
companions, talking ecitedly, frightened by his disappearance.

                                   

is eyes flicked away from the screen, looked up through the skylight
above him. utlined against the sky hung the ship. At the nose and
stern, two hemispheres of bluewhite radiance fitted over the metal
framework, like the aws of a powerful vise, holding the craft
immovable.

is gaze went back to the screen again, ust in time to see Chizzy
disappear. It was as if the man had been a mere figure chalked upon a
board ... and then someone had taken a sponge and wiped him out.

Russs fingers were flying over the keys. is thumb reached out and
tripped a lever. There was a slight hum of power.

And Chizzy stood beside him.

Chizzy did not pull his gun. e whimpered and cowered within the
invisible cradle of force.

oure yellow, ete snarled at him, but Chizzy only covered his eyes
with his arms.

ook, boss, said ete, addressing Scorio, what are you doing here? We
left you back in New ork.

Scorio did not answer. e merely glared. ete lapsed into silence,
watching.

                                   

Manning stood poised before the captives, rocking back and forth on his
heels.

A nice bag for one evening, he told Russ.

Russ grinned and stoked up his pipe.

Manning turned to the gangster chief. What do you think we ought to do
with these fellows? We cant leave them in those force shells too long
because theyll die for lack of air. And we cant let them loose because
they might use their guns on us.

isten, Manning, Scorio rasped hoarsely, ust name your price to let
us loose. Well do anything you want.

Manning drew his mouth down. I cant think of a thing. We ust dont
seem to have any use for you.

Then what in hell, the gangster asked shakily, are you going to do
with us?

ou know, said Manning, I may be a bit oldfashioned along some
lines. Maybe I am. I ust dont like the idea of killing people for
money. I dont like people stealing things other people have worked hard
to get. I dont like thieves and murderers and thugs corrupting city
governments, taking tribute on every man, woman and child in our big
cities.

But look here, Manning, pleaded Scorio, wed be good citizens if we
ust had a chance.

Mannings face hardened. ou sent these men here to kill us tonight,
didnt you?

Well, not eactly. Stutsman kind of wanted you killed, but I told the
boys ust to get the stuff in the safe and never mind killing you. I
said to them that you were pretty good eggs and I didnt like to bump
you off, see?

I see, said Manning.

e turned his back on Scorio and started to walk away. The gangster
chief came halfway out of his chair, and as he did so, Russ reached out
a single finger and tapped a key. Scorio screamed and beat with his
fists against the wall of force that had suddenly formed about him. That
single tap on the great keyboard had sprung a trap, had been the one
factor necessary to bring into being a force shell already spun and
waiting for him.

Manning did not even turn around at Scorios scream. e slowly paced his
way down the line of standing gangsters. e stopped in front of ete and
looked at him.

ete, he said, youve sprung a good many prisons, havent you?

There aint a ug in the System that can hold me, ete boasted, and
thats a fact.

I believe theres one that could, Greg told him. ne that no man has
ever escaped from, or ever will.

Whats that? demanded ete.

The ulcan Fleet, said Greg.

ete looked into the eyes of the man before him and read the purpose in
those eyes. ont send me there Send me any place but there

Greg turned to Russ and nodded. Russs fingers played their tune of doom
upon the keyboard. is thumb depressed a lever. With a roar five
gigantic material energy engines screamed with thrumming power.

ete disappeared.

The engines roared with thunderous throats, a roar that seemed to drown
the laboratory in solid waves of sound. A curious refractive effect
developed about the straining hulks as space near them bent under their
lashing power.

Months ago Russ and Greg had learned a better way of transmitting power
than by metal bars or through conducting beams. Beams of such power as
were developing now would have smashed atoms to protons and electrons.
Through a window in the side of the near engine, Greg could see the iron
ingot used as fuel dwindling under the sucking force.

                                   

The droning died and only a hum remained.

es in a prison now hell never get out of, said Greg calmly. I
wonder what theyll think when they find him, dressed in civilian
clothes and carrying a heat gun. Theyll clap him into a photocell and
keep him there until they investigate. When they find out who he is, he
wont get outhe has enough unfinished prison sentences to last a
century or two.

For ete was on one of the ulcan Fleet ships, the hellships of the
prison fleet. There were confined only the most vicious and the most
depraved of the Solar Systems criminals. e would be forced to work
under the flaming whiplashes of a Sun that hurled such intense
radiations that mere spacesuits were no protection at all. The workers
on the ulcan Fleet ships wore suits that were in reality photocells
which converted the deadly radiations into electric power. For electric
power can be disposed of where heat cannot.

uailing inside his force shell, Scorio saw his men go, one by one. Saw
them lifted and whisked away, out through the depths of space by the
magic touch upon the keyboards. With terrorwidened eyes he watched
Russ set up the euations, saw him trip the activating lever, saw the
men disappear, listened to the thunderous rumbling of the mighty
engines.

Chizzy went to the utpost, the harsh prison on Neptunes satellite. Reg
went to Titan, clear across the Solar System, where men in the infamous
penal colony labored in the frigid wastes of that moon of Saturn. Ma
went to esta, the asteroid prison, which long had been the target of
reformers, who claimed that on it  per cent of the prisoners died of
boredom and fear.

Ma was gone and only Scorio remained.

Stutsmans the one who got us into this, wailed the gangster. es
the man you want to get. Not me. Not the boys. Stutsman.

I promise you, said Greg, that well take care of Stutsman.

And Chambers, too, chattered Scorio. But you cant touch Chambers.
ou wouldnt dare.

Were not worrying about Chambers, Greg told him. Were not worrying
about anyone. oure the one who had better start doing some.

Scorio cringed.

et me tell you about a place on enus, said Greg. Its in the center
of a big swamp that stretches for hundreds of miles in every direction.
Its a sort of mountain rising out of the swamp. And the swamp is filled
with beasts and reptiles of every kind. Ravenous things, lusting for
blood. But they dont climb the mountain. A man, if he stayed on the
mountain, would be safe. Theres food there. Roots and berries and
fruits and even small animals one could kill. A man might go hungry for
a while, but soon hed find the things to eat.

But hed be alone. No one ever goes near that mountain. I am the only
man who ever set foot on it. erhaps no one ever will again. At night
you hear the screaming and the crying of the things down in swamp, but
you mustnt pay any attention to them.

                                   

Scorios eyes widened, staring. ou wont send me there

oull find my campfires, Greg told him, if the rain hasnt washed
them away. It rains a lot. So much and so drearily that youll want to
leave that mountain and walk down into the swamp, of your own free will,
and let the monsters finish you.

Scorio sat dully. e did not move. orror glazed his eyes.

Greg signed to Russ. Russ, pipe clenched between his teeth, reached out
his fingers for the keys. The engines droned.

Manning walked slowly to a television control, sat down in the chair
and flipped over a lever. A face stared out of the screen. It was
strangely filled with anger and a sort of halffear.

ou watched it, didnt you, Stutsman? Greg asked.

Stutsman nodded. I watched. ou cant get away with it, Manning. ou
cant take the law into your own hands that way.

ou and Chambers have been taking the law into your hands for years,
said Greg. All I did tonight was clear the arth of some vermin. very
one of those men was guilty of murder ... and worse.

What did you gain by it? asked Stutsman.

Greg gave a bitter laugh. I convinced you, Stutsman, he said, that it
isnt so easy to kill me. I think itll be some time before you try
again. Better luck net time.

e flipped the switch and turned about in the chair.

Russ erked his thumb at the skylight. Might as well finish the ship
now.

Greg nodded.

An instant later there was a fierce, intolerably bluewhite light that
lit the mountains for many miles. For ust an instant it flared,
eploding into millions of brilliant, harmless sparks that died into
darkness before they touched the ground. The gangster ship was destroyed
beyond all tracing, disintegrated. The metal and uartz of which it was
made were simply gone.

Russ brought his glance back from the skylight, looked at his friend.
Stutsman will do everything he can to wipe us out. By tomorrow morning
the Interplanetary machine will be rolling. With only one purposeto
crush us.

Thats right, Greg agreed, but were ready for them now. ur ship
left the Belgium factories several hours ago. The Comet towed it out
in space and its waiting for us now. In a few hours the Comet will be
here to pick us up.

War in space, said Russ, musingly. Thats what it will be.

Chambers and his gang wont fight according to any rules. Therell be
no holds barred, no more feeble attempts like the one they tried
tonight. From now on we need a base that simply cant be located.

The ship, said Russ.




CATR FRTN


The Invincible hung in space, an empty, airless hull, the largest
thing afloat.

Chartered freighters, leaving their ports from distant parts of the
arth, had converged upon her hours before, had unloaded crated
apparatus, storing it in the yawning hull. Then they had departed.

Now the sturdy little spaceyacht, Comet, was towing the great ship
out into space, , miles beyond the orbit of the Moon. Slowly the
hull was being taken farther and farther away from possible discovery.

Work on the installation of the apparatus had started almost as soon as
the Comet had first tugged at the ponderous mass. eaving only a
skeleton crew in charge of the Comet, the rest of the selected crew
had begun the assembly of the mighty machines which would transform the
Invincible into a thing of unimaginable power and speed.

The doors were closed and sealed and the air, already stored in the
ships tanks, was released. The slight acceleration of the Comets
towing served to create artificial weight for easier work, but not
enough to handicap the shifting of the heavier pieces of apparatus. An
electric cable was run back from the little yacht and the Invincible
took her first breath of life.

The work advanced rapidly, for every man was more than a mere engineer
or spacebuster. They were a selected crew, the men who had helped to
make the name of Gregory Manning famous throughout the Solar System.

First the engines were installed, then the two groups of five massive
power plants and the single smaller engine as an auiliary supply plant
for the light, heat, air.

The accumulators of the Comet were drained in a single tremendous
surge and the auiliary generator started. It in turn awoke to life the
other power plants, to leave them sleeping, idling, but ready for
instant use to develop power such as man never before had dreamed of
holding and molding to his will.

Then, with the gigantic tools these engines supplied ... tools of pure
force and strange space fields ... the work was rapidly completed. The
power boards were set in place, welded in position by a sudden furious
blast of white hot metal and as eually sudden freezing, to be followed
by careful heating and recooling till the berylsteel reached its
maimum strength. ver the hull swarmed spacesuited men, using that
strange new power, heattreating the stubborn metal in a manner never
before possible.

The generators were charging the atoms of the ships berylsteel hide
with the same hazy force that had trapped and held the gangster ship in
a mighty vise. Thus charged, no material thing could penetrate them. The
greatest meteor would be crushed to drifting dust without so much as
scarring that wall of mighty force ... meteors traveling with a speed
and penetrative power that no gunhurled proectile could ever hope to
attain.

Riding under her own power, driven by the concentration of gravitational
lines, impregnable to all known forces, containing within her hull the
secrets of many strange devices, the Invincible wheeled in space.

                                   

Russell age lounged in a chair before the control manual of the
teletransport machine. e puffed placidly at his pipe and looked out
through the great sweep of the vision panel. ut there was the black of
space and the glint of stars, the soft glow of distant upiter.

Greg Manning was hunched over the navigation controls, sharp eyes
watching the panorama of space.

Russ looked at him and grinned. n Gregs face there was a smile, but
about his eyes were lines of alert watchfulness and thought. Greg
Manning was in his proper role at the controls of a ship such as the
Invincible, a man who never stepped backward from danger, whose spirit
hungered for the vast stretches of void that lay between the worlds.

Russ leaned back, blowing smoke toward the higharched control room
ceiling.

They had burned their bridges behind them. The laboratory back in the
mountains was destroyed. ocked against any possible attack by a sphere
of force until the teletransport had lifted from it certain items of
euipment, it had been melted into a mass of molten metal that formed a
pool upon the mountain top, that ran in gushing, fiery ribbons down the
mountain side, flowing in gleaming curtains over precipices. It would
have been easier to have merely disintegrated in one bursting flash of
energy, but that would have torn apart the entire mountain range,
overwhelmed and toppled cities hundreds of miles away, dealt arth a
staggering blow.

A skeleton crew had taken the Comet back to arth and landed it on
Gregs estate. nce again the teletransport had reached out, wrapped
its fingers around the men who stepped from the little ship. In less
than the flash of a strobe light, they had been snatched back to the
Invincible, through a million miles of space, through the very walls
of the ship itself. ne second they had been on arth, the net second
they were in the control room of the Invincible, grinning, saluting
Greg Manning, trotting back to their uarters in the engine rooms.

                                   

Russ stared out at space, puffed at his pipe, considering.

A thousand years ago men had held what they called tournaments. Armored
knights rode out into the ousting grounds and broke their lances to
prove which was the better man. Today there was to be another
tournament. This ship was to be their charger, and the gauntlet had been
flung to Spencer Chambers and Interplanetary ower. And all of space was
to be the ousting grounds.

This was war. War without trappings, without fanfare, but bitter war
upon which depended the future of the Solar System. A war to break the
grip of steel that Interplanetary accumulators had gained upon the
planets, to shatter the grim dream of empire held by one man, a war for
the right to give to the people of the worlds a source of power that
would forever unshackle them.

Back in those days, a thousand years ago, men had built a system of
government that historians called the feudal system. By this system
certain men were called lords or barons and other titles. They held the
power of life and death over the men under them.

This was what Spencer Chambers was trying to do with the Solar
System ... what he would do if someone did not stop him.

                                   

Russ bit viciously on his pipestem.

The arth, the Solar System, never could revert to that ancient way of
government. The proud people spawned on the arth, swarming outward to
the other planets, must never have to bow their heads as minions to an
overlord.

The thrum of power was beating in his brain, the droning, humming power
from the engine rooms that would blast, once and forever, the last
threat of dictatorship upon any world. The power that would free a
people, that would help them on and up and outward to the great destiny
that was theirs.

And this had come because, wondering, groping, curiously, he had sought
to heat a slender thread of imperm wire within Force Field , because
another man had listened and had made available his fortune to continue
the eperiments. Blind luck and human curiosity ... perhaps even the
madness of a human dream ... and from those things had come this great
ship, this mighty power, these many bulking pieces of euipment that
would perform wonders never guessed at less than a year ago.

Greg Manning swiveled his chair. Well, Russ, were ready to begin.
ets get Wrail first.

Russ nodded silently, his mind still half full of fleeting thought.
Absentmindedly he knocked out his pipe and pocketed it, swung around to
the manual of the televisor. is fingers reached out and tapped a
pattern.

Callisto appeared within the screen, leaped upward at them. Then the
surface of the frozen little world seemed to rotate swiftly and a dome
appeared.

The televisor dived through the dome, sped through the city, straight
for a penthouse apartment.

Ben Wrail sat slumped in a chair. A newspaper was crumpled at his feet.
In his lap lay a mangled dead cigar.

Greg yelled Russ. Greg, theres something wrong

Greg leaped forward, stared at the screen. Russ heard his smothered cry
of rage.

In Wrails forehead was a tiny, neatly drilled hole from which a single
drop of blood oozed.

Murdered eclaimed Russ.

es, murdered, said Greg, and there was a sudden calmness in his
voice.

Russ grasped the televisor control. Ranthoors streets ran beneath them,
curiously silent and deserted. ere and there lay bodies. A few shop
windows were smashed. But the only living that stirred was a dog that
slunk across the street and into the shadows of an alley.

Swiftly the televisor swung along the streets. Straight into the screen
clanked a marching detail of government police, herding before them a
half dozen prisoners. The men had their hands bound behind their backs,
but they walked with heads held high.

Revolution, gasped Russ.

Not a revolution. A purge. Stutsman is clearing the city of all who
might be dangerous to him. This will be happening on every other planet
where Chambers holds control.

erspiration ran down Russs forehead and dripped into his eyes as he
manipulated the controls.

Stutsman is striking first, said Greg, calmly ... far too calmly.
es consolidating his position, possibly on the pretense that plots
have been discovered.

A few buildings were bombed. A line of bodies were crumpled at the foot
of a steel wall, marking the spot where men had been lined up and mowed
down with one sweeping blast from a heater.

Russ turned the television controls. ets see about enus and Mars.

The scenes in Ranthoor were duplicated in Sandebar on Mars, in New
Chicago, the capital of enus. verywhere Stutsman had struck ...
everywhere the purge was wiping out in blood every person who might
revolt against the Chambersdictated governments. Throughout the Solar
System violence was on the march, ironshod boots trampling the rights
of free men to tighten the grip of Interplanetary.

                                   

In the control room of the Invincible the two men stared at one
another.

Theres one man we need, said Greg. ne man, if hes still alive, and
I think he is.

Who is that? asked Russ.

ohn Moore Mallory, said Greg.

Where is he?

I dont know. e was imprisoned in Ranthoor, but Stutsman transferred
him some place else. ossibly to one of the prison fleet.

If we had the records of the Callisto prison, suggested Russ, we
could find out.

If we had the records ...

Well get them Russ said.

e swung back to the keyboard again.

A moment later the administration offices of the prison were on the
screen.

The two men searched the vision plate.

The records are most likely in that vault, said Russ. And the vault
is locked.

ont worry about the lock, snapped Greg. ust bring the whole damn
thing herevault and records and all.

Russ nodded grimly. is thumb tripped the teletransport control and
from the engine rooms came a drone of power. In Ranthoor rison, great
bands of force wrapped themselves around the vault, clutching it,
enfolding it within a sphere of power. Back in the Invincible the
engines screamed and the vault was ripped out of the solid steel wall as
easily as a man might rip a button from his shirt.




CATR FIFTN


ohn Moore Mallory sat on the single metal chair within his cell and
pressed his face against the tiny vision port. For hours he had sat
there, staring out into the blackness of space.

There was bitterness in ohn Moore Mallorys soul, a terrible and futile
bitterness. So long as he had remained within the Ranthoor prison, there
had always been a chance of escape. But now, aboard the penal ship,
there was no hope. Nothing but the taunting reaches of space, the
mocking pinpoints of the stars, the hooting laughter of the engines.

Sometimes he had thought he would go mad. The everlasting routine, the
meaningless march of hours. The work period, the sleep period ... the
work period, the sleep period ... endless monotony, an eistence without
a purpose. Men buried alive in space.

ohn Moore Mallory, said a voice.

Mallory heard, but he did not stir. An awful thought crossed his mind.
Now he was hearing voices calling his name

ohn Mallory, said the voice again.

Mallory slowly turned about and as he turned he started from his chair.

A man stood in the cell A man he had never seen before, who had come
silently, for there had been no screech of opening door.

ou are ohn Moore Mallory, arent you? asked the man.

es, I am Mallory. Who are you?

Gregory Manning.

Gregory Manning, said Mallory wonderingly. Ive heard of you. oure
the man who rescued the luto pedition. But why are you here? ow did
you get in?

I came to take you away with me, said Greg. Back to Callisto. Back to
any place you want to go.

Mallory flattened himself against the partition, his face white with
disbelief. But Im in a prison ship. Im not free to go and come as I
please.

Greg chuckled. ou are free to go and come as you please from now on,
he said. ven prison ships cant hold you.

oure mad, whispered Mallory. ither youre mad or I am. oure a
dream. Ill wake up and find you gone.

Manning stood in silence, looking at the man. Mallory bore the marks of
prison on him. is eyes were haunted and his rugged face was pinched and
thin.

isten closely, Mallory, said Greg softly. ou arent going mad and
Im not mad. ou arent seeing things. ou arent hearing things. oure
actually talking to me.

                                   

There was no change in the others face.

Mallory, Greg went on, I have what youve always neededmeans of
generating almost unlimited energy at almost no cost, the secret of the
energy of matter. A secret that will smash Interplanetary, that will
free the Solar System from Spencer Chambers. But I cant make that
secret available to the people until Chambers is crushed, until Im sure
that he cant take it from me. And to do that I need your help.

Mallorys face lost its epression of bewilderment, suddenly lighted
with realization. But his voice was harsh and bitter.

ou came too late. I cant help you. Remember, Im in a prison ship
from which no one can escape. ou have to do what you can ... you must
do what you can. But I cant be with you.

Manning strode forward. ou dont get the idea at all. I said Id get
you out of here and Im going to. I could pick up this ship and put it
wherever I wanted. But I dont want to. I ust want you.

Mallory stared at him.

ust dont be startled, said Greg. Something will happen soon. Get
ready for it.

Feet drummed on the metal corridor outside.

ey, you, pipe down yelled the voice of the guard. ou know theres
no talking allowed now. Go to sleep.

Thats the guard, Mallory whispered fiercely. Theyll stop us.

Greg grinned viciously. No, they wont.

                                   

The guard came into view through the grilled door.

So its you, Mallory ... he began, stopping in amazement. ey, you
he shouted at Greg. Who are you? ow did you get in that cell?

Greg flipped a hand in greeting. leasant evening, isnt it?

The guard grabbed for the door, but he did not reach the bars. Some
force stopped him si inches away. It could not be seen, could not be
felt, but his straining against it accomplished nothing.

Mallory and I are leaving, Greg told the guard. We dont like it
here. Too stuffy.

The guard lifted a whistle and blew a blast. Feet pounded outside. A
prisoner yelled from one of the cells. Another catcalled. Instantly the
ship was in an uproar. The convicts took up the yammering, shaking the
bars on their doors.

ets get started, Greg said to Mallory. old tight.

Blackness engulfed Mallory. e felt a peculiar twisting wrench. And then
he was standing in the control room of a ship and Gregory Manning and
another man were smiling at him. White light poured down from a cluster
of globes. Somewhere in the ship engines purred with the hum of power.
The air was fresh and pure, making him realize how foul and stale the
air of the prison ship had been.

Greg held out his hand. Welcome to our ship.

Mallory gripped his hand, blinking in the light. Where am I?

ou are on the Invincible, five million miles off Callisto.

But were you here all the time? asked Mallory. Were you in my cell
back there or werent you?

I was really in your cell, Greg assured him. I could have ust thrown
my image there, but I went there personally to get you. Russ age, here,
sent me out. When I gave him the signal, he brought both of us back.

Im glad youre with us, Russ said. erhaps youd like a cup of
coffee, something to eat.

Mallory stammered. Why, I really would. e laughed. Rations werent
too good in the prison ship.

They sat down while Russ rang the galley for coffee and sandwiches.

Crisply, Greg informed Mallory of the situation.

We want to start manufacturing these engines as soon as possible, he
eplained, but I havent even dared to patent them. Chambers would
simply buy out the officials if I tried it on arth, delay the patent
for a few days and then send through papers copied from ours. ou know
what hed do with it if he got the patent rights. ed scrap it and the
old accumulator business would go on as always. If I tried it on any
other world, with any other government, hed see that laws were passed
to block us. ed probably instruct the courts to rule against the
manufacture of the engines on the grounds that they were dangerous.

Mallorys face was grave. Theres only one answer, he said. With the
situation on the worlds, with this purge you told me about, theres only
one thing to do. We have to act at once. very minute we wait gives
Stutsman ust that much longer to tighten his hold.

And that answer? asked Russ.

Revolution, said Mallory. Simultaneous revolution in the ovian
confederacy, on Mars and enus. nce free, the planets will stay free
with your material energy engines. Spencer Chambers and his idea of
Solar System domination will be too late.

                                   

Gregs forehead was wrinkled in thought, his facial muscles tensed.

First thing to do, he said, is to contact all the men we can find ...
men we can rely on to help us carry out our plans. Well need more
televisor machines, more teleport machines, some for use on Mars and
enus, others for the ovian moons. We will have to bring the men here
to learn to operate them. Itll take a few days. Well get some men to
work on new machines right away.

e started to rise from his chair, but at that moment the coffee and
sandwiches arrived.

Greg grinned. We may as well eat first.

Mallory looked grateful and tried to keep from wolfing the food. The
others pretended not to notice.

                                   

Grim hours followed, an unrelenting search over two planets and four
moons for men whom Mallory considered loyal to his causemen willing to
risk their lives to throw off the yoke of Interplanetary.

They were hard to find. Many of them were dead, victims of the purge.
The others were in hiding and word of them was difficult to get.

But slowly, one by one, they were ferreted out, the plan eplained to
them, and then, by means of the teletransport, they were brought to the
Invincible.

our after hour men worked, stripped to their waists, in the glaring
inferno of terrible force fields, fashioning new television units. As
fast as the sets were constructed, they were placed in operation.

The work went faster than could be epected, yet it was maddeningly
slow.

For with the passing of each hour, Stutsman clamped tighter his iron
grip on the planets. Concentration camps were filled to overflowing.
Buildings were bombed and burned. Murders and eecutions were becoming
too common to be news.

Then suddenly there was a new development.

Greg, Craven has found something Russ cried. I cant get him

Supervising the installation of a new televisor set, Greg spun around.
Whats that?

Craven I cant reach him. es blocking me out

Greg helped, but the apparatus was unable to enter the Interplanetary
building in New ork. Certain other portions of the city adacent to the
building also were blanketed out. In all the Solar System, the
Interplanetary building was the only place they could not enter, ecept
the Sun itself.

Craven had developed a field from which their field shied off. The
televisor seemed to roll off it like a drop of mercury. That definitely
ended all spying on Craven and Chambers.

Russ mopped his brow, sucked at his dead pipe.

ight penetrates it, he said. Matter penetrates it, electricity, all
ordinary forces. But this field wont. Its ... well, whatever Craven
has is similarly dissimilar. The same thing of opposite nature. It
repels our field, but doesnt affect anything else. That means he has
analyzed our fields. We have Wilson to thank for this.

Greg nodded gravely. Theres ust one thing to be thankful for, he
declared. e probably isnt any nearer our energy than he was before.
But now we cant watch him. And that field of his shows that he has
tremendous power of some sort.

We cant watch him, but we can follow him, corrected Russ. e cant
shake us. None of them can. The mechanical shadow will take care of
that. I have one for Craven with a bit of bait off his spectacles and
hell keep those spectacles, never fear. es blind as a bat without
them. And we can track Chambers with his ring.

Thats right, agreed Greg, but weve got to speed up. Craven is
getting under way now. If he does this, he can do something else.
Something that will really hurt us. The mans clever ... too damn
clever.




CATR SITN


A miracle came to pass in Ranthoor when a man for whom all hope had been
abandoned suddenly appeared within the citys streets. But he appeared
to be something not uite earthly, for he did not have the solidity of a
man. e was pale, like a wraith from out of space, and one could see
straight through him, yet he still had all the old mannerisms and
tricks.

In frightened, awestricken whispers the word was spread ... the spirit
of ohn Moore Mallory had come back to the city once again. e bulked
four times the height of a normal man and there was that singular
ghostliness about him. From where he had come, or how, or why, no one
seemed to know.

But when he reached the steps of the federations administration
building and walked straight through a line of troopers that suddenly
massed to bar his way, and when he turned on those steps and spoke to
the people who had gathered, there was none to doubt that at last a sign
had come. The sign that now, if ever, was the time to avenge the purge.
Now the time to take vengeance for the blood that flowed in gutters, for
the throaty chortling of the flame guns that had snuffed out lives
against a broad steel wall.

Standing on the steps, shadowy but plainly visible, ohn Moore Mallory
talked to the people in the suare below, and his voice was the voice
they remembered. They saw him toss his black mane of hair, they saw his
clenched fist raised in terrible anger, they heard the boom of the words
he spoke.

ike a shrilling alarm the words spread through the city, reverberating
from the dome, seeking out those who were in hiding. From every corner
of the city, from its deepest cellars and its darkest alleys, poured out
a mass of humanity that surrounded the capitol and blackened the suare
and the converging streets with a mob that shrieked its hatred, bellowed
its anger.

ower thundered the mighty shadow on the steps. ower to burn ower
to give away. ower to heat the dome, to work your mines, to drive your
spaceships

ower answered the voice of the crowd. ower It sounded like a
battle cry.

No more accumulators, roared the towering image. Never again need you
rely on Spencer Chambers for your power. Callisto is yours. Ranthoor is
yours.

The black crowd surged forward, reached the steps and started to climb,
wild cheers in their throat, the madness of victory in their eyes. p
the steps came men with nothing but bare hands, screaming women, eering
children.

fficers snapped orders at the troops that lined the steps, but the
troopers, staring into the awful, raging maw of that oncoming crowd,
dropped their guns and fled, back into the capitol building, with the
mob behind them, shrilling blood lust and longawaited vengeance.

                                   

ut of the red and yellow wilderness of the deserts, a man came to
Sandebar on Mars. e had long been thought dead. The minions of the
government had announced that he was dead. But he had been in hiding for
si years.

is beard was long and gray, his eyes were curtained by hardship, his
white hair hung about his shoulders and he was clothed in the tattered
leather trappings of the spaceways.

But men remembered him.

Tom Brown had lead the last revolt against the Martian government, an
illstarred revolt that ended almost before it started when the
troopers turned loose the heavy heaters and swept the streets with
washing waves of flame.

When he climbed to the base of a statue in Techor ark to address the
crowd that gathered, the police shouted for him to come down and he
disregarded them. They climbed the statue to reach him and their hands
went through him.

Tom Brown stood before the people, in plain view, and spoke, but he
wasnt there

ther things happened in Sandebar that day. A voice spoke out of thin
air, a voice that told the people the reign of Interplanetary was over.
It told of a mighty new source of power. ower that would cost almost
nothing. ower that would make the accumulators unnecessary ... would
make them out of date. A voice that said the people need no longer
submit to the yoke of Spencer Chambers government in order to obtain
the power they needed.

There was no one there ... no one visible at all. And yet that voice
went on and on. A great crowd gathered, listening, cheering. The police
tried to break it up and failed. The troops were ordered out and the
people fought them until the voice told them to disband peaceably and go
to their homes.

Throughout Mars it was the same.

In a dozen places in Sandebar the voice spoke. It spoke in a dozen
places, out of empty air, in Malacon and Aleon and Adebron.

Tom Brown, vanishing into the air after his speech was done, reappeared
a few minutes later in Adebron and there the police, warned of what had
happened in Sandebar, opened fire upon him when he stood on a park bench
to address the people. But the flames passed through and did not touch
him. Tom Brown, his long white beard covering his chest, his mad eyes
flashing, stood in the fiery blast that bellowed from the muzzles of the
flame rifles and calmly talked.

                                   

The chief of police at New Chicago, enus, called the police
commissioner. Theres a guy out here in the park, ust across the
street. es preaching treason. es telling the people to overthrow the
government.

In the ground glass the police commissioners face grew purple.

Arrest him, he ordered the chief. Clap him in the ug. o you have to
call me up every time one of those fieryeyed boys climbs a soap bo?
Run him in.

I cant, said the chief.

The police commissioner seemed ready to eplode. ou cant? Why the
hell not?

Well, you know that hill in the center of the park? Memorial ill?

What has a hill got to do with it? the commissioner roared.

es sitting on top of that hill. es a thousand feet tall. is head
is way up in the sky and his voice is like thunder. ow can you arrest
anybody like that?

                                   

verywhere in the System, revolt was flaming. New marching songs rolled
out between the worlds, wild marching songs that had the note of anger
in them. Weapons were brought out of hiding and polished. New standards
were raised in an everrising tide against oppression.

Freedom was on the march again. The right of a man to rule himself the
way he chose to rule. A new declaration of independence. A Solar Magna
Carta.

There were new leaders, led by the old leaders. ed by spirits that
marched across the sky. ed by voices that spoke out of the air. ed by
signs and symbols and a newborn courage and a great and a deep
conviction that right in the end would triumph.

                                   

Spencer Chambers glared at udwig Stutsman. This is one time you went
too far.

If youd given me a free hand before, this wouldnt have been
necessary, Stutsman said. But you were soft. ou made me go easy when
I should have ground them down. ou left the way open for all sorts of
plots and schemes and leaders to develop.

The two men faced one another, one the smooth, tawny lion, the other the
snarling wolf.

ouve built up hatred, Stutsman, Chambers said. ou are the most
hated man in the Solar System. And because of you, they hate me. That
wasnt my idea. I needed you because I needed an iron fist, but I needed
it to use udiciously. And you have been ruthless. ouve used force
when conciliation was necessary.

Stutsman sneered openly. Still that old dream of a benevolent
dictatorship. Still figuring yourself a little bronze god to be set up
in every household. A dictatorship cant be run that way. ou have to
let them know youre boss.

Chambers was calm again. Argument wont do us any good now. The damage
is done. Revolt is flaming through all the worlds. We have to do
something.

e looked at Craven, who was slouched in a chair beside the desk across
which he and Stutsman faced each other.

Can you help us, doctor? he asked.

Craven shrugged. erhaps, he said acidly. If I could only be left to
my work undisturbed, instead of being dragged into these stupid
conferences, I might be able to do something.

ou already have, havent you? asked Chambers.

ery little. Ive been able to blank out the televisor that Manning and
age are using, but that is all.

o you have any idea where Manning and age are?

ow could I know? Craven asked. Somewhere in space.

Theyre at the bottom of this, snarled Stutsman. Their damned tricks
and propaganda.

We know theyre at the bottom of it, said Craven. Thats no news to
us. If it werent for them, we wouldnt have this trouble now, despite
your bungling. But that doesnt help us any. With this new discovery of
mine I have shielded this building from their observation. They cant
spy on us any more. But thats as far as Ive got.

They televised the secret meeting of the emergency council when it met
in Satellite City on Ganymede the other day, said Chambers. The whole
ovian confederacy watched and listened to that meeting, heard our
secret war plans, for fully ten minutes before the trick was discovered.
Couldnt we use your shield to prevent such a situation again?

Better still, suggested Stutsman, lets shield the whole satellite.
Without Mannings ghostly leaders, this revolt would collapse of its own
weight.

Craven shook his head. It takes fifty tons of accumulators to build up
that field, and a ton of fuel a day to maintain it. ust for this
building alone. It would be impossible to shield a whole planet, an
entire moon.

                                   

Any progress on your collector field? asked Chambers.

Some, Craven admitted. Ill know in a day or two.

That would give us something with which to fight Manning and age,
wouldnt it?

es, agreed Craven. It would be something to fight them with. If I
can develop that collector field, we would be able to utilize every
radiation in space, from the heat wave down through the cosmics. Within
the Solar System, our power would be absolutely limitless. our
accumulators depend for their power storage upon ust one radiation ...
heat. But with this idea I have youd use all types of radiations.

ou say you could even put the cosmics to work? asked Chambers.

Craven nodded. If I can do anything at all with the field, I can.

ow? demanded Stutsman.

By breaking them up, you fool. Smash the short, highpowered waves into
a lot of longer, lowerpowered waves. Craven swung back to face
Chambers. But dont count on it, he warned. I havent done it yet.

ou have to do it, Chambers insisted.

Craven rose from his chair, his blue eyes blazing angrily behind the
heavy lenses. ow often must I tell you that you cannot hurry
scientific investigation? ou have to try and try ... follow one tiny
clue to another tiny clue. ou have to be patient. ou have to hope. But
you cannot force the work.

e strode from the room, slammed the door behind him.

Chambers turned slowly in his chair to face Stutsman. is gray eyes
bored into the wolfish face.

And now, he suggested, suppose you tell me ust why you did it.

Stutsmans lips curled. I suppose you would rather I had allowed those
troublemakers to go ahead, consolidate their plans. There was only one
thing to doroot them out, liuidate them. I did it.

ou chose a poor time, said Chambers softly. ou would have to do
something like this, ust at the time when Manning is lurking around the
Solar System somewhere, carrying enough power to wipe us off the face of
the arth if he wanted to.

Thats why I did it, protested Stutsman. I knew Manning was around. I
was afraid hed start something, so I beat him to it. I thought it would
throw a scare into the people, make them afraid to follow Manning when
he acted.

                                   

ou have a low opinion of the human race, dont you? Chambers said.
ou think you can beat them into a mire of helplessness and fear.

Chambers rose from his chair, pounded his desk for emphasis.

But you cant do it, Stutsman. Men have tried it before you, from the
very dawn of history. ou can destroy their homes and kill their
children. ou can burn them at the stake or in the electric chair, hang
them or spacewalk them or herd them into gas chambers. ou can drive
them like cattle into concentration camps, you can keep the torture
racks bloody, but you cant break them.

Because the people always survive. Their courage is greater than the
courage of any one man or group of men. They always reach the man who
has oppressed them, they always tear him down from the place he sits,
and they do not deal gently with him when they do. In the end the
people always win.

Chambers reached across the desk and caught Stutsman by the slack of the
shirt. A twist of his hand tightened the fabric around Stutsmans neck.
The financier thrust his face close to the wolfish scowl. That is what
is going to happen to you and me. Well go down in history as ust a
couple of damn fools who tried to rule and couldnt make the grade.
Thanks to you and your damned stupidity. ou and your blood purges

atches of anger burned on Stutsmans cheeks. is eyes glittered and his
lips were white. But his whisper was bitter mockery. Maybe we should
have coddled and humored them. Made them ust so awful happy that big
bad old Interplanetary had them. So they could have set up little bronze
images of you in their homes. So you could have been sort of a solar
god

I still think it would have been the better way. Chambers flung
Stutsman from him with a straightarmed push. The man reeled and
staggered across the carpeted floor. Get out of my sight

Stutsman straightened his shirt, turned and left.

Chambers slumped into his chair, his hands grasping the arms on either
side of his great body, his eyes staring out through the window from
which flooded the last rays of the afternoon Sun.

                                   

rums pounded in his brain ... the drums of rebellion out in space, of
rebellion on those other worlds ... drums that were drowning out and
shattering forever the dream that he had woven. e had wanted economic
dictatorship ... not the cold, passionless, terrible dictatorship that
Stutsman typified ... but one that would bring peace and prosperity and
happiness to the Solar System.

e closed his eyes and thought. Snatches of ambition, snatches of
hopes ... but it was useless to think, for the drums and the imagined
shouting drowned out his thoughts.

Mankind didnt give a damn for good business administration, nor a hoot
for prosperity or peace or happiness. iberty and the right to rule, the
right to go risk ones neck ... to climb a mountain or cross a desert or
eplore a swamp, the right to aim ones sights at distant stars, to
fling a taunting challenge into the teeth of space, to probe with clumsy
fingers and force nature to lay bare her secrets ... that was what
mankind wanted. That was what those men out on Mars and enus and in
the ovian worlds were fighting for. Not against Spencer Chambers or
udwig Stutsman or Interplanetary ower, but for the thing that drove
man on and made of him a flame that others might follow. Fighting for a
heritage that was first epressed when the first man growled at the
entrance to his cave and dared the world to take it from him.

Spencer Chambers closed his eyes and rocked back and forth in the
tilting office chair.

It had been a good fight, a hard fight. e had had a lot of fun out of
it. But he was licked, after all these years. e had held the biggest
dream of any man who ever lived. Aleander and Napoleon, itler, Stalin
and those other fellows had been pikers alongside of Spencer Chambers.
They had only aimed at arthly conuest while he had reached out to grab
at all the worlds. But by heaven, hed almost made it

A door grated open.

Chambers said a voice.

is feet hit the floor with a thud and he sat stiff and staring at the
figure in the door.

It was Craven and the man was ecited. is glasses were slid far down on
his nose, his hair was standing on end, his tie was all awry.

I have it Craven whooped. I have it at last

ope clutched at Chambers, but he was almost afraid to speak.

ave what? he whispered tensely.

The collector field It was under my nose all the time, but I didnt
see it

Chambers was out of his chair and striding across the room. A tumult
buzzed within his skull.

icked? ell, he hadnt even started ed win yet. ed teach the
people to revolt ed run Manning and age out to the end of space and
push them through




CATR SNTN


It was a weird revolution. There were few battles, little blood shed.
There seemed to be no secret plots. There were no skulking leaders, no
passwords, nothing that in former years had marked rebellion against
tyranny.

It was a revolution carried out with utter boldness. Secret police were
helpless, for it was not a secret revolution. The regular police and the
troopers were helpless because the men they wanted to arrest were
shadows that flitter here and there ... large and substantial shadows,
but impossible to seize and imprison.

very scheme that was hatched within the government circles was known
almost at once to the ghostly leaders who stalked the land. olice
detachments, armed with warrants for the arrests of men who had
participated in some action which would stamp them as active rebels,
found the suspects absent when they broke down the doors. Someone had
warned them. Troops, hurried to points where riots had broken out,
arrived to find peaceful scenes, but with evidence of recent battle. The
rioters had been warned, had made their getaway.

When the rebels struck it was always at the most opportune time, when
the government was off balance or off guard.

In the first day of the revolt, Ranthoor fell when the maddened
populace, urged on by the words of a shadowy ohn Moore Mallory, charged
the federation buildings. The government fled, leaving all records
behind, to Satellite City on Ganymede.

In the first week three Martian cities fell, but Sandebar, the capital,
still held out. n enus, Radium City was taken by the rebels within
twentyfour hours after the first call to revolt had rung across the
worlds, but New Chicago, the seat of government, still was in the
governments hands, facing a siege.

Government propagandists spread the word that the material energy
engines were not safe. Reports were broadcast that on at least two
occasions the engines had blown up, killing the men who operated them.

But this propaganda failed to gain credence, for in the cities that were
in the rebel hands, technicians were at work manufacturing and setting
up the material engines. emonstrations were given. The people saw them,
saw what enormous power they developed.

                                   

Russ age stared incredulously at the television screen. It seemed to be
shifting back and forth. ne second it held the distorted view of
Satellite City on Ganymede, and the net second the view of umbled, icy
desert somewhere outside the city.

ook here, Greg, he said. Somethings wrong.

Greg Manning turned away from the calculator where he had been working
and stared at the screen.

ow long has it been acting that way? he asked.

ust started, said Russ.

Greg straightened and glanced down the row of television machines. Some
of them were dead, their switches closed, but on the screens of many of
the others was the same effect as on this machine. Their operators were
working frustratedly at the controls, trying to focus the image, bring
it into sharp relief.

Cant seem to get a thing, sir, said one of the men. I was working on
the fueling station out on Io, and the screen ust went haywire.

Mine seems to be all right, said another man. Ive had it on Sandebar
for the last couple of hours and theres nothing wrong.

A swift check revealed one fact. The machines, when trained on the
ovian worlds, refused to function. Anywhere else in space, however,
they worked perfectly.

Russ stoked and lit his pipe, snapped off his machine and swung around
in the operators chair.

Somebodys playing hell with us out around upiter, he stated calmly.

Ive been epecting something like this, said Greg. I have been
afraid of this ever since Craven blanketed us out of the Interplanetary
building.

                                   

e really must have something this time, Russ agreed. es blanketing
out the entire ovian system. Theres a space field of low intensity
surrounding all of upiter, enclosing all the moons. e keeps shifting
the intensity so that, even though we can force our way through his
field, the irregular variations make it impossible to line up anything.
It works, in principle, ust as effectively as if we couldnt get
through at all.

Greg whistled soundlessly through suddenly bared teeth.

That takes power, he said, and Im afraid Craven has it. ower to
burn.

The collector field? asked Russ.

Greg nodded. A field that sucks in radiant energy. Free energy that he
ust reaches out and grabs. And it doesnt depend on the Sun alone. It
probably makes use of every type of radiation in all of space.

Russ slumped in his chair, smoking, his forehead wrinkled in thought.

If thats what hes got, he finally declared, hes going to be hard
to crack. e can suck in any radiant vibration form, any space
vibration. e can shift them around, break them down and build them up.
e can discharge them, direct them. es got a vibration plant thats
the handiest little war machine that ever eisted.

Greg suddenly wheeled and walked to a wall cabinet. From it he took a
bo and, opening it, lifted out a tiny mechanism.

e chuckled deep in his throat. The mechanical shadow. The little
machine that always tells us where Craven isas long as hes wearing
his glasses.

e always wears them, said Russ crisply. es blind as a bat without
them.

Greg set the machine down on the table. When we find Craven, well find
the contraption thats blanketing upiter and its moons.

ials spun and needles uivered. Rapidly Russ otted down the readings
on a sheet of paper. At the calculator, he tapped keys, depressed the
activator. The machine hummed and snarled and chuckled.

Russ glanced at the result imprinted on the paper roll.

Craven is out near upiter, he announced. About , miles distant
from its surface, in a plane normal to the Suns rays.

A spaceship, suggested Greg.

Russ nodded. Thats the only answer.

The two men looked at one another.

Thats something we can get hold of, said Greg.

e walked to the ship controls and lowered himself into the pilots
chair. A hand came out and hauled back a lever.

The Invincible moved.

From the engine rooms came the whine of the gigantic power plant as it
built up and maintained the gravity concentration center suddenly
created in front of the ship.

Russ, standing beside Greg at the control panel, looked out into space
and marveled. They were flashing through space, their speed building up
at a breathtaking rate, yet they had no real propulsion power. The
discovery of the gravity concentrator had outdated such a method of
driving a spaceship. Instead, they were falling, hurtling downward into
the yawning maw of an artificial gravity field. And such a method made
for speed, terrible speed.

upiter seemed to leap at them. It became a great crimson and yellow
ball that filled almost half the vision plate.

                                   

The Invincibles speed was slacking off, slower and slower, until it
barely crawled in comparison to its former speed.

Slowly they circled upiters great girth, staring out of the vision
port for a sight of Cravens ship. They were nearing the position the
little mechanical shadow had indicated.

There it is, said Russ suddenly, almost breathlessly.

Far out in space, tiny, almost like a dust mote against the great bulk
of the monster planet, rode a tiny light. Slowly the Invincible
crawled inward. The mote of light became a gleaming silver ship, a
mighty shipone that was fully as large as the Invincible

Thats it all right, said Greg. Theyre lying behind a log out here
raising hell with our television apparatus. Maybe we better tickle them
a little bit and see what they have.

Rising from the control board, he went to another control panel. Russ
remained standing in front of the vision plate, staring down at the
ship out in space.

Behind him came a shrill howl from the power plant. The Invincible
staggered slightly. A beam of deep indigo lashed across space, a finger
suddenly abbing at the other ship.

Space was suddenly colored, for thousands of miles, as the beam struck
Cravens ship and seemed to eplode in a blast of dazzling indigo light.
The ship reeled under the impact of the blow, reeled and weaved in space
as the beam struck it and delivered to it the mighty power of the
screaming engines back in the engine room.

What happened? Greg screamed above the roar.

Russ shrugged his shoulders. ou arred him a little. ushed him
through space for several hundred miles. Made him know something had hit
him, but it didnt seem to do any damage.

That was pure cosmic I gave him Five billion horsepowerand it ust
staggered him

es got a space lens that absorbs the energy, said Russ. The lens
concentrates it and pours it into a receiving chamber, probably a huge
photocell. Nobody yet has burned out one of those things on a closed
circuit.

Greg wrinkled his brow, perpleed. What he must have is a special field
of some sort that lowers the wavelength and the intensity. es getting
natural cosmics all the time and taking care of them.

That wouldnt be much of a trick, Russ pointed out. But when he takes
care of cosmics backed by five billion horsepower ... thats something
else

Greg grinned wickedly. Im going to hand him a long heat radiation. If
his field shortens that any, hell have radio beam and that will blow
photocells all to hell.

e stabbed viciously at the keys on the board and once again the shrill
howl of the engines came from the rear of the ship. A lance of red
splashed out across space and touched the other ship. Again space was
lit, this time with a crimson glow.

                                   

Russ shook his head. Nothing doing.

Greg sat down and looked at Russ. Funny thing about this. They ust sat
there and let us throw two charges at them, took everything we gave them
and never tried to hand it back.

Maybe they havent anything to hand us, Russ suggested hopefully.

They must have. Craven wouldnt take to space with ust a purely
defensive weapon. e knew wed find him and hed have a fight on his
hands.

Russ found his pipe was dead. Snapping his lighter, he applied flame to
the blackened tobacco. Walking slowly to the wall cabinet, he lifted two
other boes out, set them on the table and took from them two other
mechanical shadows. e turned them on and leaned close, watching the
spinning dials, the uivering needles.

Greg, he whispered, Chambers and Stutsman are there in that ship with
Craven ook, their shadows register identical with the one that spotted
Craven.

I suspected as much, Greg replied. We got the whole pack cornered out
here. If we can ust get rid of them, the whole war would be won in one
stroke.

Russ lifted a stricken face from the row of tiny mechanisms. This is
our big chance. We may never get it again. The net hour could decide
who is going to win.

Greg rose from the chair and stood before the control board. Grimly he
punched a series of keys. The engines howled again. Greg twisted a dial
and the howl rose into a shrill scream.

From the Invincible another beam lashed out ... another and another.
Space was speared with beam after beam hurtling from the great ship.

Swiftly the beams went through the range of radiation, through radio and
short radio, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, ray, the gammas
and the cosmicsa terrific flood of billions of horsepower.

Cravens ship buckled and careened under the lashing impacts of the
bombardment, but it seemed unhurt

Gregs face was bleaker than usual as he turned from the board to look
at Russ.

Weve used everything we have, he said, and hes stopped them all. We
cant touch him.

                                   

Russ shivered. The control room suddenly seemed chilly with a
frightening kind of cold.

es carrying photocells and several thousand tons of accumulator
stacks. Not much power left in them. e could pour a billion horsepower
into them for hours and still have room for more.

Greg nodded wearily. All weve been doing is feeding him.

The engines were humming uietly now, singing the low song of power held
in leash.

But then they screamed like a buzz saw biting into an ironhard stick of
white oak. Screamed in a single, frightful agony as they threw into the
protecting wall that enclosed the Invincible all the power they could
develop.

The air of the ship was instantaneously charged with a hazy, bluish
glow, and the sharp, stinging odor of ozone filled the ship.

                                   

utside, an enormous burst of bluewhite flame splashed and spattered
around the Invincible. iving lightning played in solid, snapping
sheets around the vision port and ran in trickling blazing fire across
the plates.

Russ cried out and backed away, holding his arm before his eyes. It was
as if he had looked into a nova of energy eploding before his eyes.

In the instant the scream died and the splash of terrific fire had
vanished. nly a rapidly dying glow remained.

What was it? asked Russ dazedly. What happened? Ten engines every one
of them capable of over five billion horsepower and every one of them
screaming

Craven, said Greg grimly. e let us have everything he had. e simply
drained his accumulator stacks and threw it all into our face. But hes
done now. That was his only shot. ell have to build up power now and
that will take a while. But we couldnt have taken much more.

Stalemate, said Russ. We cant hurt him, he cant hurt us.

Not by a damn sight, declared Greg. I still have a trick or two in
mind.

e tried them. From the Invincible a fiftybillionhorsepower bolt of
living light and fire sprang out as all ten engines thundered with an
insane voice that racked the ship.

Fireworks eploded in space when the bolt struck Cravens ship. Screen
after screen eploded in glittering, flaming sparks, but the ship rode
the lashing charge, finally halted the thrust of power. The beam glowed
faintly, died out.

erspiration streamed down Gregs face as he bent over a calculator and
constructed the formula for a magnetic field. e sent out a field of
such unimaginable intensity that it would have drawn any berylsteel
within a mile of it into a hard, compact mass. ven the Invincible, a
hundred miles away, lurched under the strain. But Cravens ship, after
the first wild erk, did not move. A curious soft glow spread out from
the ship, veered sharply and disappeared in the magnetic field.

Greg swore softly. es cutting it down as fast as I try to build it
up, he eplained, and I cant move it any nearer.

From Cravens ship lashed out another thunderbolt and once again the
engines screamed in terrible unison as they poured power into the ships
triple screen. The first screen stopped all material things. The second
stopped radiations by refracting them into the fourth dimension. The
third shield was akin to the antientropy field, which stopped all
matter ... and yet the ten engines bellowed like things insane as Craven
struck with flaming bolts, utilizing the power he had absorbed from the
fifty billion horsepower Greg had thrown at him.

There was anger in Greg Mannings face ... a terrible anger. is fists
knotted and he shook them at the gleaming ship that lay far down near
upiter.

Ive got one trick left, he shouted, almost as if he epected Craven
to hear. ust one trick. amn you, see if you can stop this one

e set up the pattern on the board and punched the activating lever. The
ten engines thrummed with power. Then the howling died away.

Four times they screamed and four times they ebbed into a gentle hum.

Get on the navigation controls yelled Greg. Be ready to give the
ship all youve got.

Greg leaped for the control chair, grasped the acceleration lever.

Now, growled Greg, look out, Craven, were coming at you

Greg, teeth gritted, slammed the acceleration over.

Suddenly all space wrenched horribly with a nauseating, terrible thud
that seemed to strain at the very anchors of the niverse.




CATR IGTN


upiter and the ovian worlds leaped suddenly backward, turned swiftly
green, then blue, and faded in an instant into violet. The Sun spun
crazily through space, retreating, dimming to a tiny rubytinted star.

The giant generators in the Invincible hummed louder now, continually
louder, a steelthroated roar that trembled through every plate, through
every girder, through every bit of metal in the ship.

The ship itself was plunging spaceward, streaking like a runaway star
for the depths of space beyond the Solar System. And behind it, caught
tight, gripped and held, Cravens ship trailed at the end of a tractor
field that bound it to the spacerocketing Invincible.

The acceleration compensator, functioning perfectly, had taken up the
slack as the ship had plunged from a standing start into a speed that
neared the pace of light. But it had never been built to stand such
sudden, intense acceleration, and for an instant Russ and Greg seemed
to be crushed by a mighty weight that struck at them. The sensation
swiftly lifted as the compensator took up the load.

                                   

Greg shook his head, flinging the trickling perspiration from his eyes.

I hope their compensator worked as well as ours, he said.

If it didnt, declared Russ, were towing a shipload of dead men.

Russ glanced at the speed dial. They were almost touching the speed of
light. e hasnt cut down our speed yet.

We threw him off his balance. is drive depends largely on the mass of
some planet as a body to take up the reaction of his ship. upiter is
the ideal body for that ... but hes leaving upiter behind. e has to
do something soon or itll be too late.

es getting less energy, too, said Russ. Were retreating from his
main sources of energy, the Sun and upiter. Almost the speed of light
and that would cut down his energy intake terrifically. e has to use
what hes got in his accumulators, and after that last blast at us, they
must be nearly drained.

As Russ watched, the speed needle fell off slightly. Russ held his
breath. It edged back slowly, creeping. The speed was being cut down.

Craven is using whatever power he has, he said. Theyre alive back
there, all right. es trying to catch hold of upiter and make its
gravity work for him.

The Invincible felt the strain of the other ship now. Felt it as
Craven poured power into his drive, fighting to get free of the
invisible hawser that had trapped him, fighting against being dragged
into outer space at the tailend of a mighty craft heading spaceward
with frightening speed.

Girders groaned in the Invincible, the engines moaned and throbbed.
The speed needle fell back, creeping down the dial, slowly, unwillingly,
resisting any drop in speed. But Craven was cutting it down. And as he
cut it, he was able to absorb more energy with his collector lens. But
he was fighting two things ... momentum and the steadily decreasing
gravitational pull of upiter and the Sun. The Suns pull was dwindling
slowly, upiters rapidly.

The needle still crept downward.

Whats his point of euality to us? demanded Greg. Will we make it?

Russ shook his head. Wont know for hours. ell be able to slow us
up ... maybe hell even stop us or be able to erk free, although I
doubt that. But every minute takes him farther away from his main source
of power, the Solar Systems radiation. e could collect power anywhere
in space, you know, but the best place to collect it is near large
radiant bodies.

Russ continued to crouch over the dial, begrudging every backward
flicker of the needle.

This was the last play, the final hand. If they could drag Craven and
his ship away from the Solar System, maroon him deep in space, far
removed from any source of radiation, they would win, for they could go
back and finish the work of smashing Interplanetary.

But if Craven wonif he could halt their mad dash for space, if he
could shake freetheyd never have another chance. e would be studying
that field they had wrapped around him, be ready for it net time, might
even develop one like it and use it on the Invincible. If Craven could
win his way back to the Sun, he would be stronger than they were, could
top them in power, shatter all their plans, and once again the worlds
would bow to Interplanetary and Spencer Chambers.

Russ watched the meter. The speed was little more than ten miles a
second now and dropping rapidly. e sat motionless, hunched, sucking at
his dead pipe, listening to the thrumming of the generators.

                                   

If we only had a margin, he groaned. If we ust had a few more
horsepower. ust a few. But were wide open. very engine is developing
everything it can

Greg tapped him on the shoulder, gently. Russ turned his head and looked
into the face of his friend, a face as bleak as ever, but with a hint of
smile in the corners of the eyes.

Why not let upiter help us? he asked. e could be a lot of help.

Russ stared for a moment, uncomprehending. Then with a sob of gladness
he reached out a hand, shoved over a lever. Mirrors of antientropy
shifted, assumed different angles, and the Invincible sheered off.
They were no longer retreating directly from the Sun, but at an angle
uartering off across the Solar System.

Greg grinned. Were falling behind upiter now. etting upiter run
away from us as he circles his orbit, following the Sun. Adds miles per
second to our velocity of retreat, even if it doesnt show on the dial.

The cosmic tug of war went on, grimlytwo ships straining, fighting
each other, one seeking to escape, the other straining to snake the
second ship into the maw of open, hostile space.

The speed was down to five miles a second, then a fraction lower. The
needle was flickering now, impossible to decide whether it was dropping
or not. And in the engine rooms, ten great generators howled in their
attempt to make that needle move up the dial again.

Russ lit his pipe, his eyes not leaving the dial. The needle was
creeping lower again. own to three miles a second now.

e puffed clouds of smoke and considered. Saturn fortunately was ninety
degrees around in his orbit. n the present course, only Neptune
remained between them and free space. luto was far away, but even if it
had been, it really wouldnt count, for it was small and had little
attraction.

In a short while Ganymede and Callisto would be moving around on the far
side of upiter and that might help. verything counted so much now.

The dial was down to two miles a second and there it hung. ung and
stayed. Russ watched it with narrowed eyes. By this time Craven
certainly would have given up much hope of help from upiter. If the big
planet couldnt have helped him before, it certainly couldnt now. In
another hour or two arth would transit the Sun and that would cut down
the radiant energy to some degree. But in the meantime Craven was
loading his photocells and accumulators, was laying up a power reserve.
As a last desperate resort he would use that power, in a final attempt
to break away from the Invincible.

Russ waited for that attempt. There was nothing that could be done about
it. The engines were developing every watt of power that could be urged
out of them. If Craven had the power to break away, he would break
away ... that was all there would be to it.

An hour passed and the needle crept up a fraction of a point. Russ was
still watching the dial, his mind foggy with concentration.

                                   

Suddenly the Invincible shuddered and seemed to totter in space, as if
something, some mighty force, had struck the ship a terrific blow. The
needle swung swiftly backward, reached one mile a second, dipped to half
a mile.

Russ sat bolt upright, holding his breath, his teeth clenched with death
grip upon the pipestem.

Craven had blasted with everything he had e had used every last
trickle of power in the accumulators ... all the power he had been
storing up.

Russ leaped from the chair and raced to the periscopic mirror.
Stooping, he stared into it. Far back in space, like a silver bauble,
swung Cravens ship. It swung back and forth in space, like a mighty,
cosmic pendulum. Breathlessly he watched. The ship was still in the grip
of the space field

Greg, he shouted, weve got him

e raced back to the control panel, snapped a glance at the speed dial.
The needle was rising rapidly now, a full mile a second. Within another
fifteen minutes, it had climbed to a mile and a half. The Invincible
was starting to go places

The engines still howled, straining, shrieking, roaring their defiance.

In an hour the needle indicated the speed of four miles a second. Two
hours later it was ten and rising visibly as upiter fell far behind and
the Sun became little more than a glowing cinder.

Russ swung the controls to provide side acceleration and the two ships
swung far to the rear of Neptune. They would pass that massive planet at
the safe distance of a full hundred million miles.

e wont even make a pass at it, said Greg. e knows hes licked.

robably trying to store some more power, suggested Russ.

Sweet chance he has to do that, declared Greg. ook at that needle
walk, will you? Well hit the speed of light in a few more hours and
after that he may ust as well shut off his lens. There ust wont be
any radiation for him to catch.

Craven didnt make a try at Neptune. The planet was far away when they
intersected its orbit ... furthermore, a wall of darkness had closed in
about the ships. They were going three times as fast as light and the
speed was still accelerating

our after hour, day after day, the Invincible and its trailing
captive sped doggedly outward into space. ut into the absolute wastes
of interstellar space, where the stars were flecks of light, like tiny
eyes watching from very far away.

                                   

Russ lounged in the control chair and stared out the vision plate. There
was nothing to see, nothing to do. There hadnt been anything to see or
do for days. The controls were locked at maimum and the engines still
hammered their roaring song of speed and power. Before them stretched an
empty gulf that probably never before had been traversed by any
intelligence, certainly not by man.

ut into the mystery of interstellar space. nly it didnt seem
mysterious. It was very commonplace and ordinary, almost monotonous.
Russ gripped his pipe and chuckled.

There had been a day when men had maintained one couldnt go faster than
light. Also, men had claimed that it would be impossible to force nature
to give up the secret of material energy. But here they were, speeding
along faster than light, their engines roaring with the power of
material energy.

They were plowing a new space road, staking out a new path across the
deserts of space, pioneering far beyond the last frontier.

Gregs steps sounded across the room. Weve gone a long way, Russ.
Maybe we better begin to slow down a bit.

es, agreed Russ. e leaned forward and grasped the controls. Well
slow down now, he said.

Sudden silence smote the ship. Their ears, accustomed for days to the
throaty roarings of the engines, rang with the torture of no sound.

ong minutes and then new sounds began to be heard ... the soft humming
of the single engine that provided power for the interior apparatus and
the maintenance of the outer screens.

Soon as we slow down below the speed of light, said Greg, well throw
the televisor on Cravens ship and learn what we can about his
apparatus. No use trying it now, for we couldnt use it, because were
in the same space condition it uses in normal operation.

In fact, laughed Russ, we cant do much of anything ecept move.
nergies simply cant pass through this space were in. Were marooned.

Greg sat down in a chair, gazed solemnly at Russ.

ust what was our top speed? he demanded.

Russ grinned. Ten thousand times the speed of light, he said.

Greg whistled soundlessly. A long way from home.

                                   

Far away, the stars were tiny pinpoints, like little crystals shining by
the reflection of a light. inpoints of light and shimmering masses of
lacy silver ... star dust that seemed ghostly and strange, but was in
reality the massing of many million mighty stars. And great empty black
spaces where there was not a single light, where the dark went on and on
and did not stop.

Greg ehaled his breath softly. Well, were here.

Wherever that might be, amended Russ.

There were no familiar constellations, not a single familiar star. very
sign post of the space they had known was wiped out.

There really arent any brilliant stars, said Russ. None at all. We
must be in a sort of hole in space, a place thats relatively empty of
any stars.

Greg nodded soberly. Good thing we have those mechanical shadows.
Without them wed never find our way back home. But we have several that
will lead us back.

utside the vision panel, they could see Cravens ship. Freed now of the
space field, it was floating slowly, still under the grip of the
momentum they had built up in their dash across space. It was so close
that they could see the lettering across its bow.

So they call it the Interplanetarian, said Russ.

Greg nodded. Guess its about time we talk to them. Im afraid theyre
getting pretty nervous.

                                   

o you have any idea where we are? demanded udwig Stutsman.

Craven shook his head. No more idea than you have. Manning snaked us
across billions of miles, clear out of the Solar System into
interstellar space. Take a look at those stars and you get some idea.

Spencer Chambers stroked his gray mustache, asked calmly What do you
figure our chances are of getting back?

Thats something well know more about later, said Craven. oesnt
look too bright right now. Im not worrying about that. What Im
wondering about is what Manning and age are going to do now that they
have us out here.

I thought youd be, said a voice that came out of clear air.

They stared at the place from which the voice had seemed to come. There
was a slight refraction in the air then, swiftly, a man took shape. It
was Manning. e stood before them, smiling.

ello, Manning, said Craven. I figured youd pay us a call when you
got around to it.

ook here, snarled Stutsman, but he stopped when Chambers hand fell
upon his shoulder, gripped it hard.

Got plenty of air? asked Greg.

Air? Sure. Atmosphere machines working perfectly, Craven replied.

Fine, said Greg. ow about food and water? lenty of both?

lenty, said Craven.

ook here, Manning, broke in Chambers, wheres all this uestioning
leading? What have you got up your sleeve?

ust wanted to be sure, Greg told him. Would hate to have you fellows
starve on me, or go thirsty. Wouldnt want to come back and find you all
dead.

Come back? asked Chambers wonderingly. Im afraid I dont understand.
Is this a oke of some sort?

No oke, said Greg grimly. I thought you might have guessed. Im
going to leave you here.

eave us here? roared Stutsman.

eep your shirt on, snapped Greg. ust for a while, until we can go
back to the Solar System and finish a little ob were doing. Then well
come back and get you.

Craven grimaced. I thought it would be something like that. e
suinted at Manning through the thick lenses. ou never miss a bet, do
you?

Greg laughed. I try not to.

A little silence fell upon the three men and Mannings image.

Greg broke it. ow about your energy collector? he asked Craven. Will
it maintain the ship out here? ou get cosmic rays. Not too much else,
Im afraid.

Craven grinned wryly. oure right, but we can get along. The
accumulators are practically drained, though, and we wont be able to
store anything. Would you mind shooting us over ust a little power?
nough to charge the accumulators a little for emergency use.

e looked over his shoulder, almost apprehensively.

There might be an emergency out here, you know. Nobody knows anything
about this place.

Ill give you a little power, Greg agreed.

Thank you very much, said Craven, half in mockery. No doubt you think
yourself uite smart, Manning, getting us out here. ou know you have us
stranded, that we cant collect more than enough power to live on.

Thats why I did it, Greg said, and vanished.




CATR NINTN


Craven watched the Invincible gather speed and tear swiftly through
the black, saw it grow tiny and then disappear entirely, either
swallowed by the distance or snapping into the strange superspace that
eisted beyond the speed of light.

e turned from the window, chuckling.

Stutsman snarled at him Whats so funny?

The scientist glared at the wolfish face and without speaking, walked to
the desk and sat down. e reached for pencil and paper.

Chambers walked over to watch him.

ouve found something, octor, he said uietly.

Craven laughed, throatily. es, I have. Ive found a lot. Manning
thinks he can keep us out here, but hes wrong. Well be in the Solar
System less than a week after he gets there.

Chambers stifled a gasp, tried to speak calmly. ou mean this?

f course I mean it. I dont waste my time with foolish okes.

ou have the secret of material energy?

Not that, the scientist growled, but I have something else as
valuable. I have the secret of Mannings drive I know what it is that
enables him to eceed the speed of light ... to go ten thousand times as
fast as light ... the ord knows how much faster if he wanted to.

No ordinary drive would do that, said Chambers. It would take more
than power to make a ship go that fast.

ou bet your life it would, and Manning is the boy whos got it. e
uses a space field. I think I can duplicate it.

And how long will it take you to do this work?

About a week, Craven told him. erhaps a little longer, perhaps a
little less. But once we go, well go as fast as Manning does. Well be
short on power, but I think I can do something about that, too.

Chambers took a chair beside the desk. But do we know the way home?

We can find it, said Craven.

But there are no familiar constellations, obected Chambers. e
dragged us out so far that there isnt a single star that any one of us
can identify.

I said Id find the Solar System, Craven declared impatiently, and I
will. Manning started out for it, didnt he? I saw the way he went. The
Sun is a type G star and all Ill do is look for a type G star.

But there may be more than one type G star, obected the financier.

robably are, Craven agreed, but there are other ways of finding the
Sun and identifying it.

e volunteered no further information, went back to work with the pad
and pencil. Chambers rose wearily from his chair.

Tell me when you know what we can do, he said.

Sure, Craven grunted.

                                   

Thats the Sun, said Craven. That faint star between those two
brighter ones.

Are you sure of it? demanded Stutsman.

f course. I dont make blunders.

Its the only type G star in that direction, suggested Chambers,
helpfully.

Not that, either, declared Craven. In fact, there are several type G
stars. I eamined them all and I know Im right.

ow do you know? challenged Stutsman.

Spectroscopic eamination. That collector field of ours gathers energy
ust like a burning glass. ouve seen a burning glass, havent you?

e stared at Stutsman, directing the uestion at him.

Stutsman shuffled awkwardly, unhappily.

Well, Craven went on, I used that for a telescope. Gathered the light
from the suns and analyzed it. f course it didnt act like a real
telescope, produce an image or anything like that, but it was ideal for
spectroscopic work.

They waited for him to eplain. Finally, he continued

All of the stars I eamined were ust type G stars, nothing else, but
there was a difference in one of them. First, the spectroscope showed
lines of reflected light passing through oygen and hydrogen, water
vapor and carbon dioide. ure planetary phenomena, never found on a
star itself. Also it showed that a certain per cent of the light was
polarized. Now remember that I eamined it for a long time and I found
out something else from the length of observation which convinces me.
The light varied with a periodic irregularity. The chronometers arent
working eactly right out here, so I cant give you any eplanation in
terms of hours. But I find a number of regularly recurring changes in
light intensity and character ... and that proves the presence of a
number of planetary bodies circling the star. Thats the only way one
could eplain the fluctuations for the Gtype star is a steady type. It
doesnt vary greatly and has no light fluctuations to speak of. Not like
the Cepheid and Mira types.

And that proves its our Sun? asked Chambers.

Craven nodded. Fairly definitely, Id say.

ow far away is it? Stutsman wanted to know.

                                   

Craven snorted. ou would ask something like that.

But, declared Stutsman, there are ways of measuring how far a star is
away from any point, measuring both the distance and the size of the
star.

kay, agreed Craven, you find me something solid and within reach
thats measurable. Something, preferably, about  million miles or so
across. Then Ill tell you how far we are from the Sun. This ship is not
in an orbit. Its not fied in space. I have no accurate way of
measuring distances and angles simultaneously and accurately. specially
angles as small as these would be.

Craven and Stutsman glared at one another.

Its a long way however you look at it, the financier said. If were
going to get there, well have to start as soon as possible. ow soon
can we start, octor?

ery soon. I have the gravity concentration field developed and
Manning left me ust enough power to get a good start. e chuckled,
took off his glasses, wiped the lenses and put them back on again.
Imagine him giving me that power

But after we use up that power, what are we going to do? demanded
Chambers. This collector lens of yours wont furnish us enough to keep
going.

oure right, Craven conceded, but well be able to get more. Well
build up what speed we can and then well shut off the drive and let
momentum carry us along. In the meantime our collector will gather power
for us. Were advancing toward the source of radiation now, instead of
away from it. ut here, where theres little gravity stress, fewer
conflicting lines of gravitation, well be able to spread out the field,
widen it, make it thousands of miles across. And the new photocells
will be a help as well.

ow are the photocells coming? asked Chambers.

Craven grinned. Well have a bank of them in within a few hours, and
replace the others as fast as we can. I have practically the whole crew
at work on them. Manning doesnt know it, but he found the limit of
those photocells when he was heaving energy at us back in the Solar
System. e blistered them. I wouldnt have thought it possible, but it
was. ou have to hand it to Manning and age. They are a couple of smart
men.

To the eye there was only one slight difference between the old cells
and the new ones. The new type cell, when on no load, appeared milky
white, whereas the old cells on no load were silvery. The granular
surface of the new units was responsible for the difference in
appearance, for each minute section of the surface was covered with even
more minute metallic heagonal pyramids and prisms.

ust a little matter of variation in the alloy, Craven eplained.
Crystalization of the alloy, forming those little prisms and pyramids.
As a result, you get a surface thousands of times greater than in the
old type. elps you absorb every bit of the energy.

                                   

The Interplanetarian arrowed swiftly starward, driving ahead with
terrific momentum while the collector lens, sweeping up the oncoming
radiations, charged the great banks of accumulators. The Gtype star
toward which they were heading was still pale, but the two brighter
stars to either side blazed like fiery ewels against the black of
space.

ou say well be only a week or so behind Manning? asked Chambers.

Craven looked at the financier, his eyes narrowed behind the heavy
lenses. e sucked in his loose lips and turned once again to the control
board.

erhaps a little longer, he admitted finally. Were losing time,
having to go along on momentum in order to collect power. But the nearer
we get to those stars, the more power well have and well be able to
move faster.

Chambers drummed idly on the arm of his chair, thinking.

erhaps theres time yet, he said, half to himself. With the power
well have within the Solar System, we can stop Manning and the
revolution. We can gain control again.

                                   

Craven was silent, watching the dials.

Manning might even pass us on the way back to look for us, Chambers
went on. e thinks were still out there. e wouldnt epect to find us
where we are, light years from where we started.

Craven shot him a curious look. I wouldnt be too sure of that. Manning
has a string of some sort tied to us. es got us tagged ... good and
proper. es always been able to find us again, no matter where we were.
I have a hunch hell find us again, even way out here.

Chambers shrugged his shoulders. It really doesnt matter. ust so we
get close enough to the Sun so we can load those accumulators and am
the photocells full. With a load like that we can beat him hands down.

The financier fell into a silence. e stared out of the vision plate,
watching the stars. Still far away, but so much nearer than they had
been.

is brain hummed with dreams. ld dreams, revived again, old dreams of
conuest and of empire, dreams of a power that held a solar system in
its grip.

Craven broke his chain of thoughts. Wheres our friend Stutsman? I
havent seen him around lately.

Chambers chuckled goodnaturedly. es sulking. e seems to have gotten
the idea neither one of us likes him. es been spending most of his
time back in the engine room with the crew.

Were you talking about me? asked a silky voice.

They spun around to see Stutsman standing in the doorway of the control
room. is face was twisted into a wolfish grin and in his right hand he
held a heat gun.

Chambers voice was sharp, like the note of a clanging bell. Whats
this?

Stutsmans face twisted into an even more eaggerated grin. This, he
said, is mutiny. Im taking over e laughed at them.

No use calling the crew. Theyre with me.

amn you shouted Chambers, taking a step forward. e halted as
Stutsman erked the pistol up.

Forget it, Chambers. oure ust second man from now on. Maybe not even
second man. ou tried out this dictator business and you bungled it. ou
went soft. oure taking orders from me from now on. No uestions, no
back talk. ou do as I say and maybe you wont get hurt.

oure mad, Stutsman cried Chambers. ou cant get away with this.

Stutsman barked out a brittle laugh. Who is going to stop me?

The people, Chambers shouted at him. The people will. They wont
allow this. When you get back to the Solar System ...

Stutsman growled, stepping toward Chambers, pistol leveled. The people
wont have anything to say about this. Ill rule the Solar System the
way I want to. There wont be anyone else wholl have a thing to say
about it. So you dreamed of empire, did you? ou dreamed of a solar
dictatorship. Well, watch me Ill build a real empire. But Ill be the
head of it ... not you.

Craven sat down in his chair, crossed his knees. ust what do you plan
to do, ictator Stutsman?

                                   

Stutsman fairly foamed at the mouth over the insolence of Cravens
voice. Ill smash Manning first. Ill wipe him out. This ship will do
it. ou said yourself it would. ou have ten times the power he has. And
then ...

Craven raised a hand and waved him into silence. So you plan to reach
the Solar System, do you? ou plan to meet Manning, and destroy his
ship. Nice plan.

Whats wrong with it? challenged Stutsman.

Nothing, said Craven calmly. Absolutely nothing at all ... ecept
that we may never reach the Solar System

Stutsman seemed to sag. The wolfish snarl on his lips drooped. is eyes
stared. Then with an effort he braced himself.

What do you mean? Why cant we? e gestured toward the vision plate,
toward the tiny yellow star between the two brighter stars.

That, said Craven, isnt our Sun. It has planets, but it isnt our
Sun.

Chambers stepped uickly to Craven, reached out a hand and hoisted him
from the chair, shook him.

ou must be oking That has to be the Sun

Craven shrugged free of Chambers clutch, spoke in an even voice. I
never oke. We made a mistake, thats all. I hadnt meant to tell you
yet. I had intended to get in close to the star and take on a full load
of power and then try to locate our Sun. But Im afraid its a hopeless
task.

A hopeless task? shrieked Stutsman. ou are trying to trick me. This
is put up between the two of you. Thats the Sun over there. I know it
is

It isnt, said Craven. Manning tricked us. e started off in the
wrong direction. e made us think he was going straight back to the
Solar System, but he didnt. e circled and went in some other
direction.

The scientist eyed Stutsman calmly. Stutsmans knuckles were white with
the grip he had upon the gun.

Were lost, Craven told him, looking suarely at him. We may never
find the Solar System




CATR TWNT


The revolution was over. Interplanetary officials and army heads had
fled to the sanctuary of arth. Interplanetary was ended ... ended
forever, for on every world, including arth, material energy engines
were humming. The people had power to burn, to throw away, power so
cheap that it was practically worthless as a commodity, but invaluable
as a way to a new life, a greater life, a fuller life ... a broader
destiny for the human race.

Interplanetary stocks were worthless. The mighty power plants on enus
and Mercury were idle. The only remaining tangible asset were the fleets
of spaceships used less than a month before to ship the accumulators to
the outer worlds, to bring them Sunward for recharging.

atents protecting the rights to the material energy engines had been
obtained from every government throughout the Solar System. New
governments were being formed on the wreckage of the old. ohn Moore
Mallory already had been inaugurated as president of the ovian
confederacy. The elections on Mars and enus would be held within a
week.

Mercury, its usefulness gone with the smashing of the accumulator trade,
had been abandoned. No human foot now trod its surface. Its mighty domes
were empty. It went its way, as it had gone for billions of years, a
little burned out, worthless planet, ignored and shunned. For a brief
moment it had known the conuering tread of mankind, had played its part
in the commerce of the worlds, but now it had reverted to its former
state ... a lonely wanderer of the regions near the Sun, a pariah among
the other planets.

                                   

Russell age looked across the desk at Gregory Manning. e heaved a sigh
and dug the pipe out of his acket pocket.

Its finished, Greg, he said.

Greg nodded solemnly, watching Russ fill the bowl and apply the match.

cept for the small crew, they were alone in the Invincible. ohn
Moore Mallory and the others were on their own worlds, forming their own
governments, carrying out the dictates of the people, men who would go
down in solar history.

The Invincible hung ust off Callisto. Russ looked out at the mighty
moon, saw the lonely stretches of its icebound surface, saw the silvery
spot that was the dome of Ranthoor.

All done, said Greg, ecept for one thing.

Go out and get Chambers and the others, said Russ, puffing at the
pipe.

Greg nodded. We may as well get started.

Russ rose slowly, went to the wall cabinet and lifted out a bo, the
mechanical shadow with its tiny space field surrounding the fleck of
steel that would lead them to the Interplanetarian. Carefully he
lifted the machine from its resting place and set it on the desk.
Bending over it, he watched the dials.

Suddenly he whistled. Greg, theyve moved They arent where we left
them

Greg sprang to his side and stared at the readings. Theyre moving
farther away from us ... out into space. Where can they be going?

Russ straightened, scowling, pulling at the pipe. They probably found
another Gtype star, and are heading for that. They must think it is old
Sol.

That sounds like it, said Greg. We spun all over the map to throw
Craven off and looped several times so hed lose all sense of direction.
Naturally he would be lost.

But hes evidently got something, Russ pointed out. We left him
marooned ... dead center, out where he didnt have too much radiation
and couldnt get leverage on any single body. et hes movingand
getting farther away all the time.

e solved our gravitation concentration screen, said Greg. e tricked
us into giving him power to build it.

The two men looked at one another for a long minute.

Well, said Russ, thats that. Craven and Chambers and Stutsman. The
three villains. All lost in space. eading for the wrong star.
opelessly lost. Maybe theyll never find their way back.

e stopped and relit his pipe. An aching silence fell in the room.

oetic ustice, said Russ. ail and farewell.

Greg rubbed his fist indecisively along the desk. I cant do it, Russ.
We took them out there. We marooned them. We have to get them back or I
couldnt sleep nights.

Russ laughed uietly, watching the bleak face that stared at him. I
knew thats what youd say.

e knocked out the pipe, crushed a fleck of burning tobacco with his
boot. ocketing the pipe, he walked to the control panel, sat down and
reached for the lever. The engines hummed louder and louder. The
Invincible darted spaceward.

                                   

Its too late now, said Chambers. By the time we reach that planetary
system and charge our accumulators, Manning and age will have
everything under control back in the Solar System. ven if we could
locate the star that was our Sun, we wouldnt have a chance to get there
in time.

Too bad, Craven said, and wagged his head, looking like a solemn owl.
Too bad. ictator Stutsman wont have a chance to strut his stuff.

Stutsman started to say something and thought better of it. e leaned
back in his chair. From his belt hung a heat pistol.

Chambers eyed the pistol with illconcealed disgust. Theres no point
in playing soldier. We arent going to try to upset your mutiny. So far
your taking over the ship hasnt made any difference to us ... so why
should we fight you?

It isnt going to make any difference either, said Craven. Because
there are ust two things that will happen to us. Were either lost
forever, will never find our way back, will spend the rest of our days
wandering from star to star, or Manning will come out and take us by the
ear and lead us home again.

Chambers started, leaned forward and fastened his steely eyes on Craven.
o you really think he could find us?

I have no doubt of it, Craven replied. I dont know how he does it,
but Im convinced he can. robably, however, hell find that we are lost
and get rid of us that way.

No, said Chambers, youre wrong there. Manning wouldnt do that.
ell come to get us.

I dont know why he should, snapped Craven.

Because hes that sort of man, declared Chambers.

What you going to do when he does get out here? demanded Stutsman.
Fall on his neck and kiss him?

Chambers smiled, stroked his mustache. Why, no, he said. I imagine
well fight. Well give him everything weve got and hell do the same.
It wouldnt seem natural if we didnt.

oure damned right we will, growled Stutsman. Because Im running
this show. ou seem to keep forgetting that. We have power enough, when
we get those accumulators filled, to wipe him out. And that is eactly
what Im going to do.

Fine, said Craven, mockingly, ust fine. Theres ust one thing you
forget. Manning is the only man who can lead us back to the Solar
System.

ell, stormed Stutsman, that doesnt make any difference. Ill find
my way back there some way.

oure afraid of Manning, Chambers challenged.

Stutsmans hand went down to the heat pistols grip. is eyes glazed and
his face twisted itself into utter hatred. I dont know why I keep on
letting you live. Craven is valuable to me. I cant kill him. But you
arent. ou arent worth a damn to anyone.

                                   

Chambers matched his stare. Stutsmans hand dropped from the pistol and
he slouched to his feet, walked from the room.

Afraid of Manning e laughed, a hollow, gurgling laugh. Afraid of
Manning

But he was.

Within his brain hammered a single sentence. Words he had heard Manning
speak as he watched over the television set at Mannings mocking
invitation. Words that beat into his brain and seared his reason and
made his soul shrivel and grow small.

Manning talking to Scorio. Talking to him matteroffactly, but grimly
I promise you that well take care of Stutsman

Manning had taken Scorio and his gangsters one by one and sent them to
far corners of the Solar System. ne out to the dreaded ulcan Fleet,
one to the utpost, one to the Titan prison, and one to the hellhole
on esta, while Scorio had gone to a little mountain set in a enus
swamp. They hadnt a chance. They had been locked within a force shell
and shunted through millions of miles of space. No trial, no hearing ...
nothing. ust terrible, unrelenting udgment.

I promise you that well take care of Stutsman

                                   

Cravens only a few billion miles ahead now, said Gregory Manning.
With our margin of speed, we should overhaul him in a few more hours.
e is still short on power, but hes remedying that rapidly. es
getting nearer to that sun every minute. Running in toward it as he is,
he tends to sweep up outpouring radiations. That helps him collect a
whole lot more than he would under ordinary circumstances.

Russ, sitting before the controls, pipe clenched in his teeth, watching
the dials, nodded soberly.

All Im afraid of, he said, is that hell get too close to that sun
before we catch up with him. If he gets close enough so he can fill
those accumulators, hell pack a bigger wallop than we do. Itll all be
in one bolt, of course, for his power isnt continuous like ours. e has
to collect it slowly. But when hes really loaded, he can give us aces
and still win. Id hate to take everything he could pack into those
accumulators.

Greg shuddered. So would I.

The Invincible was eceeding the speed of light, was enveloped in the
mysterious darkness that characterized the speed. They could see nothing
outside the ship, for there was nothing to see. But the tiny mechanical
shadow, occupying a place of honor on the navigation board, kept them
informed of the position and the distance of the Interplanetarian.

Greg lolled in his chair, watching Russ.

I dont think we need to worry about him throwing the entire load of
the accumulators at us, he said. e wouldnt dare load those
accumulators to peak capacity. es got to leave enough carrying
capacity in the cells to handle any olts we send him and he knows we
can send him plenty. e has to keep that handling margin at all times,
over and above what he takes in for power, because his absorption screen
is also a defensive screen. And he has to use some power to keep our
television apparatus out.

Russ chuckled. I suppose, at that, we have him plenty worried.

The thunder of the engines filled the control room. For days now that
thunder had been in their ears. They had grown accustomed to it, now
hardly noticed it. Ten mighty engines, driving the Invincible at a
pace no other ship had ever obtained, ecept, possibly, the
Interplanetarian, although lack of power should have held Cravens
ship down to a lower speed. Craven wouldnt have dared to build up the
acceleration they had now attained, for he would have drained his banks
and been unable to charge them again.

Maybe he wont fight, said Russ. Maybe hes figured out by this time
that hes heading for the wrong star. e may be glad to see us and
follow us back to the Solar System.

No chance of that. Craven and Chambers wont pass up a chance for a
fight. Theyll give us a few wallops if only for the appearance of
things.

Were crawling up all the time, said Russ. If we can catch him within
four or five billion miles of the star, he wont be too tough to handle.
Be getting plenty of radiations even then, but not uite as much as he
would like to have.

ell have to start decelerating pretty soon, Greg declared. e cant
run the chance of smashing into the planetary system at the speed hes
going. e wont want to waste too much power using his field as a brake,
because he must know by this time that were after him and hell want
what power he has to throw at us.

ours passed. The Invincible crept nearer and nearer, suddenly seemed
to leap ahead as the Interplanetarian began deceleration.

eep giving her all you got, Greg urged Russ. Weve got plenty of
power for braking. We can overhaul him and stop in a fraction of the
time he does.

Russ nodded grimly. The distance indicator needle on the mechanical
shadow slipped off rapidly. Greg, leaping from his chair, hung over it,
breathlessly.

I think, he said, we better slow down now. If we dont, well be
inside the planetary system.

ow far out is Craven? asked Russ.

Not far enough, Greg replied unhappily. e cant be more than three
billion miles from the star and that stars hot. A class G, all right,
but a good deal younger than old Sol.

                                   

Well let them know weve arrived, grinned Greg. e sent a stabbing
beam of half a billion horsepower slashing at the Interplanetarian.

The other ship staggered but steadied itself.

They know, said Russ cryptically from his position in front of the
vision plate. We shook them up a bit.

They waited. Nothing happened.

Greg scratched his head. Maybe you were right. Maybe they dont want to
fight.

Together they watched the Interplanetarian. It was still moving in
toward the distant sun, as if nothing had happened.

Well see, said Greg.

Back at the controls he threw out a gigantic tractor beam, catching the
other ship in a net of forces that visibly cut its speed.

Space suddenly vomited lashing flame that slapped back and licked and
crawled in living streamers over the surface of the Invincible. The
engines moaned in their valiant battle to keep up the outer screen. The
pungent odor of ozone filtered into the control room. The whole ship was
bucking and vibrating, creaking, as if it were being pulled apart.

So they dont want to fight, eh? hooted Russ.

Greg gritted his teeth. They snapped the tractor beam.

They have power there, Russ declared.

Too much, said Greg. More power than they have any right to have.

is hand went out to the lever on the board and pulled it back. A beam
smashed out, with the engines screaming drive behind it, billions of
horsepower driving with unleashed ferocity at the other ship.

Gregs hand spun a dial, while the generators roared thunderous
defiance.

Im giving them the radiation scale, said Greg.

The Interplanetarian was staggering under the terrific bombardment,
but its screen was handling every ounce of the power that Greg was
pouring into it.

Their photocells cant handle that, cried Russ. No photocell would
handle all that stuff youre shooting at them. nless ...

nless what?

nless Craven has improved on them.

Well have to find out. Get the televisor.

                                   

Russ leaped for the television machine.

A moment later he lifted a haggard face.

I cant get through, he said. Cravens got our beams stopped and now
he has our television blocked out.

Greg nodded. We might have epected that. When he could scramble our
televisors back in the ovian worlds, he certainly ought to be able to
screen his ship against them.

e shoved the lever clear over, slamming the etreme limit of power
into the beam. The engines screamed like demented things, howling and
shrieking. Instantly a tremendous sheet of solid flame spun a fiery web
around the Interplanetarian, turning it into a blazing inferno of
lapping, leaping fire.

A dozen terrific beams, billions of horsepower in each, stabbed back at
the Invincible as the Interplanetarian shunted the terrific energy
influ from the overcharged accumulators to the various automatic energy
discharges.

The Invincibles screen flared in defense and the ten great engines
wailed in utter agony. More stabbing flame shot from the
Interplanetarian in slow eplosions.

The temperature in the Invincibles control room was rising. The ozone
was sharp enough to make their eyes water and nostrils burn. The vision
glass was blanked out by the lapping flames that crawled and writhed
over the screen outside the glass.

Russ tore his collar open, wiped his face with his shirt sleeve. Try a
pure magnetic

Greg, his face set and bleak as a wall of stone, grunted agreement. is
fingers danced over the control manual.

Suddenly the stars outside twisted and danced, like stars gone mad, as
if they were dancing a riotous ig in space, some uproariously hopping
up and down while others were applauding the show that was being
provided for their unblinking eyes.

The magnetic field was tightening now, twisting the light from those
distant stars and bending it straight again. The Interplanetarian
reeled like a drunken thing and the great arcs of electric flame looped
madly and plunged straight for the fields very heart.

                                   

The stars danced weirdly in faroff space again as the
Interplanetarians accumulators lashed out with tremendous force to
oppose the energy of the field.

The field glowed softly and disappeared.

They have us stopped at every turn, groaned Russ. There must be some
way, something we can do. e looked at Greg. Greg grinned without
humor, wiping his face. There is something we can do, said Russ
grimly. We should have thought of it long ago.

e strode to the desk, reached out one hand and drew a calculator near.

ou keep them busy, he snapped. Ill have this thing figured out in
ust a while.

From the engine rooms came the roar and hum of the laboring units and
the Invincible shuddered once again as Greg grimly hurled one beam
after another, at the Interplanetarian.

The Interplanetarian struck back, using radio freuency that flamed
fiercely against the Invincibles outer screen. Simultaneously the
Interplanetarian leaped forward with a sudden surge of accumulated
energy, driving at the star that lay not more than three billion miles
away.

Greg worked desperately, cursing under his breath. e pulled down the
outer screen that was fighting directly against the radio freuency,
energy for energy, and allowed the beam to strike suarely on the second
screen, the inversion field that shunted the maor portion of the energy
impacting against it through  degrees into another space.

The engines moaned softly and settled into a uieter rumble as the
necessity of supplying the first screen was eliminated. But they
screamed once again as Greg sent out a tractor beam that seized and
held, dragged the Interplanetarian to a standstill. Cravens ship had
gained millions of miles, though, and established a tremendous advantage
by fighting nearer to its source of energy.

Russ, gasped Greg, if you dont get that scheme of yours figured out
pretty soon, were done for. Theyve stopped everything weve got.
Theyre nearer the sun. We wont stand a chance if they make another
break like that.

Russ glanced up to answer, but his mouth fell open in amazement and he
did not speak. A streak of terrible light was striking at them from the
Interplanetarian, blinding white light, and along that highway of
light swarmed a horde of little green figures, like suirming green
amebas. Swarming toward the Invincible, stretching out hungry,
palegreen pseudopods toward the inversion barrier ... and eating
through it

Wherever they touched, holes appeared. They drifted through the
inversion screen easily and began drilling into the inner screen of
antientropy. ating their way into the antientropy ... into a state
of matter which Russ and Greg had thought would resist all change

                                   

For seconds both men stood transfied, unable to believe the evidence of
their eyes. But the ameba things came on in everincreasing throngs,
creatures that gnawed and slobbered at the antientropy, eating into it,
flaking it away, drilling their way through it.

When they pierced the antientropy, they would cut through the steel
plates of the Invincible like so much paper

And more were coming. More and more

With a grunt of amazement, Greg slammed a beam straight into the heart
of the amebas. They ate the beam and vanished as mistily as before,
little glowing things that ate and died. But there were always more to
take their place. They overwhelmed the beam and ate back along its
length, attacked the screen again.

They ate through walls of force and walls of metal, and a rush of
hissing air began to flame into ions in the terrific battle of energies
outside the Invincible.

Russ was crouching over the manual of the televisor board. is breath
moaned in his throat as his fingers flew.

I have to have power, Greg, he said. ots of power.

Take it. Greg replied. I havent been able to do anything with it. It
isnt any use to me.

Russs thumb reached out and tripped the activating lever. The giant
engines shrieked and yowled.

Something was happening on the television screen ... something
terrifying. Cravens ship seemed to retreat suddenly for millions of
miles ... and as suddenly the Invincible appeared on the screen. For a
single flashing instant, the view held then it was gone in blank
grayness. For seconds nothing happened on the screen, unnerving seconds
while the two men held their breath.

The screens grayness fled and they looked into the control room of the
Interplanetarian. Craven was hunched in a chair, intent upon a series
of controls. Behind him and to one side stood Stutsman, a heat pistol
dangled from his hand, his face twisted into a sneer of triumph. There
was no sign of Chambers.

ou damn fool, Craven was snapping at Stutsman. oure cheating us
out of the only chance we ever had of getting home.

                                   

Shut up, snarled Stutsman, the pistol erking in his hand. ave you
got that apparatus on full power?

Its been on full power for minutes now, said Craven. It must be
eating holes straight through Mannings ship.

See you keep it that way. I really dont need you any more, anyhow.
Ive watched and I know all the tricks. I could carry on this battle
singlehanded.

Craven did not reply, merely hunched closer over the controls, eyes
watching flickering dials.

Greg ogged Russs elbow. That must be the apparatus over there, in the
corner of the room. That triangular affair. A condenser of some sort.
That stuff theyre throwing at us must be supersaturated force fields
and theyd need a spacefield condenser for that.

Russ nodded. Well take care of that.

is fingers moved swiftly and a transport beam whipped out, riding the
television beam. Bands of force wrapped around the triangular machine
and wrenched viciously. In the screen the apparatus disappeared ...
simply was gone. It now lay within the Invincibles control room,
erked there by the teletransport.

The flood of dazzling light reaching out from the Interplanetarian
snapped off and the little green ameba things were gone. The shrill
whistle of escaping air stopped as the eaten screens clamped down again,
sealing in the atmosphere despite the holes bored through the metal
plates.

In the television screen, Craven leaped from his chair, was staring with
Stutsman at the place where the concentrator had stood. The machine had
been ripped from a welded base and agged, bright, torn metal gleamed in
the control room lights. Snapped cables and broken busbars lay piled
about the room.

What happened? Stutsman was screaming. They heard Craven laugh at the
terror in the others voice. Manning ust walked in and grabbed it away
from us.

But he couldnt We had the screen up e couldnt get through

Craven shrugged his shoulders. I dont know how he did it, but he did.
robably he could clean out the whole place if he wanted to.

Thats a good idea, said Russ, udiciously.

e stripped bank after bank of the other ships photocells from their
moorings, wrecked the force field controls, ripped cables from the
engines and left the ship without means of collecting power, without
means of using power, without means of movement, of offense or defense.

                                   

e leaned back in his chair and regarded the screen with deep
satisfaction.

That, he decided, should hold them for a while.

e hauled the pipe out of his pocket and filled it from the battered
leather pouch.

Greg regarded him with a uizzical stare. ou sent the televisor back
in time. ou got it inside the Interplanetarian before Craven had run
up his screen and then you brought it forward.

ou guessed it, said Russ, tamping the tobacco into the bowl. We
should have thought of that long ago. We have a time factor there. In
fact, the whole thing revolves around time. We move the televisor, we
use the teletransport, by giving the obects we wish to move an
acceleration in time.

Greg wrinkled his brow. Maybe that means we can really investigate the
past, or even the future. Can sit here before our screen and see
everything that has happened, everything that is going to happen.

Russ shook his head. I dont know, Greg. Notice, though, that we got no
screen response until the televisor came up out of the past and actually
reached the point which coincided with the present. That is, the screen
and the televisor itself have to be on the same time level for them to
operate. We might modify the screen, even modify the televisor so that
we could travel in time, but it will take a lot of research, a lot of
work. And especially it will take a whale of a lot of power.

We have the power, said Greg.

Russ moved the lighter back and forth over the tobacco, igniting it
carefully. Clouds of blue smoke swirled around his head. e spoke out of
the smoke.

Right now, he said, we better see how Craven and our other friends
are getting along. I didnt like the way Stutsman was talking or the way
he was swinging that gun around. And Chambers wasnt anywhere in sight.
Theres something screwy about the entire thing.

                                   

What are we going to do now? demanded Stutsman.

Craven grinned at him. Thats up to you. Remember, youre the master
mind around here. ou took over and said you were going to run things.
e waved a casual hand at the shattered machines, the rippedout
apparatus. Well, there you are. Go ahead and run the oint.

But you will have to help, pleaded Stutsman, his face twisted until it
seemed that he was suffering intense physical agony. ou know what to
do. I dont.

Craven shook his head. There isnt any use starting. Manning will be
along almost anytime now. Well wait and see what he has in mind.

Manning shrieked Stutsman, waving the pistol wildly. Always Manning.
ne would think you were working for Manning.

es the big shot out in this little corner of space right now, Craven
pointed out. There isnt any way you can get around that.

Stutsman backed carefully away. is gun came up and he looked at Craven
appraisingly, as if selecting his targets.

ut down that gun, said a voice.

Gregory Manning stood between Stutsman and Craven. There had been no
foggy forerunner of his appearance. e had ust snapped out of empty
air.

Stutsman stared at him, his eyes widening, but the gun remained steady
in his hand.

ook out, Craven, warned Greg. es going to fire and it will go
right through me and hit you.

                                   

There was the thump of a falling body as Craven hurled himself out of
his chair, hit the floor and rolled. Stutsmans gun vomited flame. The
spouting flame passed through Gregs image, blasted against the chair in
which Craven had sat, fused it until it fell in on itself.

Russ, said Greg uietly, disarm this fellow before he hurts
somebody.

An unseen force reached out and twisted the gun from Stutsmans hand,
flung it to one side. Swiftly Stutsmans hands were forced behind his
back and held there by invisible bonds.

Stutsman cried out, tried to struggle, but he was unable to move. It was
as if giant hands had gripped him, were holding him in a viselike
clutch.

Thanks, Manning, said Craven, getting up off the floor. The fool
would have shot this time. es threatened it for days. e has been
developing a homicidal mania.

We dont need to worry about him now, declared Greg. e turned around
to face Craven. Wheres Chambers?

Stutsman locked him up, said Craven. I imagine he has the key in his
pocket. ocked him up in the stateroom. Chambers umped him and tried to
take the gun away from him and Stutsman laid him out, hit him over the
head. e kept Chambers locked up after that. asnt allowed anyone to go
near the room. asnt even given him food and water. That was three days
ago.

Get the key out of his pocket, directed Greg. Go and see how Chambers
is.

Alone in the control room with Stutsman, Greg looked at him.

I have a score to settle with you, Stutsman, he said. I had intended
to let it ride, but not now.

ou cant touch me, blustered Stutsman. ou wouldnt dare.

What makes you think I wouldnt?

oure bluffing. ouve got a lot of tricks, but you cant do the
things you would like me to think you can. ouve got Chambers and
Craven fooled, but not me.

It may be that I can offer you definite proof.

Chambers staggered over the threshold. is clothing was rumpled. A rude
bandage was wound around his head. is face was haggard and his eyes
red.

ello, Manning, he said. I suppose youve won. The Solar System must
be in your control by now.

e lifted his hand to his mustache, brushed it, a feeble attempt at
playing the old role hed acted so long.

Weve won, said Greg uietly, but youre wrong about our being in
control. The governments are in the hands of the people, where they
should be.

Chambers nodded. I see, he mumbled. ifferent people, different
ideas. is eyes rested on Stutsman and Greg saw sudden rage sweep
across the gray, haggard face. So youve got him, have you? What are
you going to do with him? What are you going to do with all of us?

I havent had time to think about it, said Greg. Ive principally
been thinking about Stutsman here.

e mutinied, rasped Chambers. e seized the ship, turned the crew
against me.

And the penalty for that, said Greg, uietly, is death. eath by
walking in space.

Stutsman writhed within the bands of force that held him tight. is face
contorted. No, damn you ou cant do that Not to me, you cant

Shut up, roared Chambers and Stutsman uieted.

I was thinking, too, said Greg, that at his order thousands of people
were mercilessly shot down back in the Solar System. Stood against a
wall and mowed down. thers were killed like wild animals in the street.
Thousands of them.

                                   

e moved slowly toward Stutsman and the man cringed.

Stutsman, he said, youre a butcher. oure a stench in the nostrils
of humanity. ou arent fit to live.

Those, said Craven, are my sentiments eactly.

ou hate me, screamed Stutsman. All of you hate me. ou are doing
this because you hate me.

veryone hates you, Stutsman, said Greg. very living person hates
you. ou have a cloud of hate hanging over you as black and wide as
space.

The man closed his eyes, trying to break free of the bonds.

Bring me a spacesuit, snapped Greg, watching Stutsmans face.

Craven brought it and dropped it at Stutsmans feet.

All right, Russ, said Greg. Turn him loose.

Stutsman swayed and almost fell as the bands of force released him.

Get into that suit, ordered Greg.

Stutsman hesitated, but something he saw in Gregs face made him lift
the suit, step into it, fasten it about his body.

What are you going to do with me? he whimpered. ou arent going to
take me back to arth again, are you? ou arent going to make me stand
trial?

No, said Greg, gravely, we arent taking you back to arth. And
youre standing trial right now.

Stutsman read his fate in the cold eyes that stared into his. Chattering
frightenedly, he rushed at Greg, plunged through him, collided with the
wall of the ship and toppled over, feebly attempting to rise.

Invisible hands hoisted him to his feet, gripped him, held him upright.
Greg walked toward him, stood facing him.

Stutsman, he said, you have four hours of air. That will give you
four hours to think, to make your peace with death. e turned toward
the other two. Chambers nodded grimly. Craven said nothing.

And now, said Greg to Craven, if you will fasten down his helmet.

The helmet clanged shut, shutting out the pleas and threats that came
from Stutsmans throat.

                                   

Stutsman saw distant stars, cruel, gleaming eyes that glared at him.
mpty space fell away on all sides.

Numbed by fear, he realized where he was. Manning had picked him up and
thrown him far into space ... out into that waste where for hundreds of
light years there was only the awful nothingness of space.

e was less than a speck of dust, in this great immensity of emptiness.
There was no up or down, no means of orientation.

oneliness and terror closed in on him, a terrible agony of fear. In
four hours his air would be gone and then he would die is body would
swirl and eddy through this great cosmic ocean. It would never be found.
It would remain here, embalmed by the cold of space, until the last clap
of eternity.

There was one way, the easy way. is hand reached up and grasped the
connection between his helmet and the air tank. ne wrench and he would
die swiftly, uickly ... instead of letting death stalk him through the
darkness for the net four hours.

e shivered and his hand loosened its hold, dropped away. e was afraid
to hasten death. e wanted to put it off. e was afraid of death ...
horribly afraid.

The stars mocked him and he seemed to hear hooting laughter from
somewhere far away. Curiously, it sounded like his own laughter....

                                   

Ill make it easy for you, Manning, Chambers said. I know that all of
us are guilty. Guilty in the eyes of the people and the law. Guilty in
your eyes. If we had won, there would have been no penalty. Theres
never a penalty for the one who wins.

enalty, said Greg, his eyes half smiling. Why, yes, I think there
is. Im going to order you aboard the Invincible for something to eat
and to get some rest.

ou mean to say that we arent prisoners?

Greg shook his head. Not prisoners, he said. Why, I came out here to
guide you back to arth. I hauled you out here and got you into this
am. It was up to me to get you out of it. I would have done the same
for Stutsman, too, but ...

e hesitated and looked at Chambers.

Chambers stared back and slowly nodded.

es, Manning, he said. I think I understand.




CATR TWNTN


Chambers lit his cigar and leaned back in his chair.

I wish you could see it my way, Manning, he said. Theres no place
for me on arth, no place for me in the Solar System. ou see, I tried
and failed. Im ust a hasbeen back there.

e laughed uietly. Somehow, I cant imagine myself coming back in the
role of the defeated tribal leader, chained to your chariot, so to
speak.

But it wouldnt be that way, protested Greg. our company is gone,
true, and your stocks are worthless, but you havent lost everything.
ou still have a fleet of ships. With our new power, the Solar System
will especially need ships. ots of ships. For the spacelanes will be
filled with commerce. oud be coming back to a new deal, a new Solar
System, a place that has been transformed almost overnight by power
thats practically free.

es, yes, I know all that, said Chambers. But I climbed too high. I
got too big. I cant come back now as something small, a failure.

ou have things we need, said Greg. The screen that blankets out our
television and teletransport, for eample. We need your screen as a
safeguard against the very thing we have created. Think of what criminal
uses could be made of the teletransport. No vault, no net of charged
wires, nothing, could stop a thief from taking anything he wanted.
risons would cease to be prisons. Criminals could reach in and pick up
their friends, no matter how many guards there were. risons and bank
vaults and national treasuries could be cleaned out in a single day.

Then theres the supersaturated space fields, added Russ, ruefully.
Those almost got us. If I hadnt thought of moving the televisor
through time, we would have had to pull stakes and run for it.

No, you wouldnt, pointed out Craven. ou could have wiped us out in
a moment. ou can disintegrate matter. Send it up in a puff of smoke ...
rip every electron apart and send it hurtling away.

f course we could have, Craven, said Greg, but we wouldnt.

Chambers laughed softly. Not uite mad enough at us to do that, eh?

Greg looked at him. I guess that must have been it.

But Im curious about the green space fields, persisted Russ.

Simple, said Craven. They were ust fields that had more energy
packed into a certain portion of space than space could take. Space
fields that had far more than their share of energy, more than they
could hold. A supersaturated solution will crystalize almost
immediately onto the tiniest crystal put into it. Those fields acted the
same way. They crystalized instantly into hyperspace the moment they
came into contact with other energy, whether as photons of radiation,
matter or other space fields. our antientropy didnt stand a chance
under those conditions. When they crystalized, they took a chunk of the
field along with them, a small chunk, but one after another they ate a
hole right through your screen.

                                   

Something like that would have a commercial value, said Greg. seful
in war, too, and now that mankind has taken to space, now that were
spreading out, we must think of possible attack. There must be life on
other planets throughout the Galay. Someday theyll come. If they
dont, someday well go to them. And we may need every type of armament
we can get our hands on.

Chambers knocked the ash off his cigar and was staring out the vision
port. The ship had swung so that through the port could be seen the
distant star toward which the Interplanetarian had been driving.

For my part, said Chambers, slowly, measuring each word, you can have
those findings of ours. Well give them to you, knowing you will use
them as they should be used. Craven can tell you how they work. That is,
if Craven wants to. e is the man who developed them.

Certainly, said Craven. Theyll be something to remember us by.

                                   

But you are coming back with us, arent you? asked Greg.

Craven shook his head. No, Im going with Chambers. I dont know what
hes thinking of, but whatever it is, its all right with me. Weve been
together too long. Id miss someone to fight with.

Chambers was still staring out the vision port. e was talking, but he
did not seem to be talking to them.

I had a dream, you see. I saw the people struggling against the
inefficiency and stupidity of popular government. I saw the periodic
rise of bad leaders. I saw them lead the people into blunders. I read
history and I saw that since the time man had risen from the ape, this
had been going on. So I proposed to give the people scientific
government ... a business administration. An administration that would
have run the government eactly as a successful businessman runs his
business. The people would have resented it if I had told them they
didnt know how to run their affairs. There was only one way to do
it ... gain control and force it down their throats.

Chambers was no longer a beaten man, no longer a man with a white
bandage around his head and his power stripped from him. nce again he
was the fighting financier who had sat back at the desk in the
Interplanetary building on arth and issued orders ... orders that sped
across millions of miles of space.

e shrugged his shoulders. They didnt want it. Man doesnt want to
live under scientific government. e doesnt want to be protected
against blunders. e wants what he calls freedom. The right to do the
things he wants to do, even if it means making a damn fool of himself.
The right to rise to great heights and tumble to eually low depths.
Thats human nature and I ruled it out. But you cant rule out human
nature.

They sat in silence, no one speaking. Russ cupped his pipe bowl in his
hand and watched Chambers. Chambers leaned back and slowly puffed at
the cigar. Greg ust sat, his face unchanging.

Craven finally broke the silence. ust what are you planning to do?

Chambers flicked his hand toward the distant sun that gleamed through
the vision port.

Theres a new solar system out there, he said. New worlds, a new sun.
A place to start over again. ou and I discovered it. Its ours by right
of discovery. Well go there and stake out our claim.

But there may be nothing there, protested Greg. That sun is younger
than our Sun. The planets may not have cooled as yet. ife may not have
developed.

In such a case, said Chambers, we shall find another planetary system
around another sun. A system that has cooled, where there is life.

Russ gasped. ere was something important, something that should set a
precedent. The first men to roam from star to star seeking new worlds.
The first men to turn their backs on the old solar system and strike out
in search of new worlds swinging in their paths around distant suns.

Greg was saying, All right, if thats the way you want it. I was hoping
youd come back with us. But well help you repair your ship. Well give
you all the supplies we can spare.

Russ rose to his feet. That, he said, calls for a little drink.

e opened a cabinet and took out bottles and glasses.

nly three, said Chambers. Craven doesnt drink.

Craven interrupted. our one for me, too, age.

Chambers looked at the scientist, astounded. I never knew you to take a
drink in your life.

Craven twisted his face into a grin. This is a special occasion.

                                   

The Invincible was nearing Mars, heading for arth, which was still a
greenish sphere far to one side of the flaming Sun.

Russ watched the little green globe, thinking.

arth was home. To him it always would be home. But that would be
changed soon. ust a few more generations, and, to millions upon
millions of human beings, arth no longer would be home.

With the new material energy engines, life on every planet would be
possible now, even easy. The cost of manufacture, mining, shipping
across the vast distances between the planets would be only a fraction
of what it had been when man had been forced to rely upon the unwieldy,
epensive accumulator system of supplying lifegiving power.

Now Mars would have power of her own. ven luto could generate her own.
And power was ... well, it was power. The power to live, the power to
work, to establish and maintain commerce, to adust gravity to arth
standard or to any standard. The power to remake and reshape and rebuild
planetary conditions to suit man eactly.

arthmen and arthwomen would be moving out en masse now to the new and
virgin fields of endeavorto the farms of enus, to the manufacturing
centers that were springing up on Mars, to the mines of the ovian
worlds, to the great laboratory plants that would spring up on Titan and
on luto and on the other colder worlds.

The migration of races had started long ago. In the ld Stone Age, the
CroMagnon had swept out of nowhere to oust the Neanderthal. Centuries
later the barbarians of the north, in another of those restless
migrations, had overwhelmed and swept away the Roman mpire. And many
centuries later, migration had turned from urope to a new world across
the sea, and fighting Americans had battled their way from east to west,
conuering a continent.

And now another great migration was onman was leaving the arth,
moving into space. e was leaving behind him the world that had reared
and fostered him. e was striking out and out. First the planets would
be overrun, and then man would leap from the planets to the stars

                                   

For years after America had become a country, had built a tradition of
her own, urope was regarded by millions as the homeland. But as the
years swept by, this had ceased to be and the Americas were a world unto
themselves, owing nothing to urope.

And that was the way it would be with arth. For centuries, for
thousands of years, arth would be the Mother lanet, the homeland for
all the millions of roaming men and women who dared the gulfs of space
and the strangeness of new worlds. There would be trips back to the
arth for sentimental reasons ... to see the place where ones ancestors
were born and had lived, to goggle at the monument which marked the
point from which the first spaceship had taken off for the Moon, to
visit old museums and see old cities and breathe the air that men and
women had breathed for thousands of years before they found the power to
take them anywhere.

In the end, arth would be ust a wornout planet. ven now her
minerals were rapidly being ehausted her oil wells were dry and all
her coal was mined her industry stabilized and filled her businesses
interlocking and highly competitive. A world that was too full, that had
too many things, too many activities, too many people. A world that
didnt need men and women. A world where even genius was kept from
rising to the top.

And this was what was driving mankind away from the arth. The
competition, the crowded conditions, in business and industrial fields,
the lack of opportunity for new development, the everlasting struggle to
get ahead, fighting for a place to live when millions of others were
fighting for the same thing. But not entirely that, not that alone.
There was something elsethat old adventuresome spirit, the driving
urge to face new dangers, to step over old frontiers, to do and dare, to
make a damn fool of ones self, or to surpass the greatest
accomplishments of history.

But arth would never die, for there was a part of arth in every man
and woman who would go forth into space, part of arths courage, part
of arths ideals, part of arths dreams. The habits and the virtues
and the faults that arth had spawned and fostered ... these were things
that would never die. ld arth would live forever. ven when she was
drifting dust and the Sun was a dead, cold star, arth would live on in
the courage and the dreams that by that time would be spreading to the
far corners of the Galay.

Russ dug the pipe out of his pocket, searched for the pouch, found it on
the desk behind him. It was empty.

ell, he said, my tobaccos all gone.

Greg grinned. ou wont have to wait long. Well be back on arth in a
few more hours.

Russ put the stem between his teeth, bit down on it savagely. I guess
thats right. I can dry smoke her until we get there.

arth was larger now. Mars had swung astern.

Suddenly a winking light stabbed out into space from the night side of
arth. Signaling ... signaling ... clearing the spacelanes for a greater
future than any human prophet had ever predicted.


The nd





nd of the roect Gutenberg Book of mpire, by Clifford onald Simak

 N F TIS RCT GTNBRG B MIR 

 This file should be named .tt or .zip 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in
        httpwww.gutenberg.org

roduced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the nline
istributed roofreading Team at httpwww.pgdp.net


pdated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a nited States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
and you can copy and distribute it in the nited States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of se part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing roect Gutenbergtm electronic works to
protect the RCT GTNBRGtm concept and trademark.  roect
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  ou may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given awayyou may do
practically ANTING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subect to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



 START F ICNS 

T F RCT GTNBRG ICNS
AS RA TIS BFR  ISTRIBT R S TIS WR

To protect the roect Gutenbergtm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
or any other work associated in any way with the phrase roect
Gutenberg, you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full roect
Gutenbergtm icense available with this file or online at
httpgutenberg.netlicense.


Section .  General Terms of se and Redistributing roect Gutenbergtm
electronic works

.A.  By reading or using any part of this roect Gutenbergtm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
trademarkcopyright agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of roect Gutenbergtm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a roect
Gutenbergtm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph ...

.B.  roect Gutenberg is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most roect Gutenbergtm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph .C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with roect
Gutenbergtm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to roect Gutenbergtm electronic
works.  See paragraph . below.

.C.  The roect Gutenberg iterary Archive Foundation the Foundation
or GAF, owns a compilation copyright in the collection of roect
Gutenbergtm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the nited States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the nited States and you are
located in the nited States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to roect Gutenberg
are removed.  f course, we hope that you will support the roect
Gutenbergtm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing roect Gutenbergtm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the roect Gutenbergtm name associated with
the work.  ou can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full roect
Gutenbergtm icense when you share it without charge with others.

..  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the nited States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other roect
Gutenbergtm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the nited
States.

..  nless you have removed all references to roect Gutenberg

...  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full roect Gutenbergtm icense must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a roect Gutenbergtm work any work on which the
phrase roect Gutenberg appears, or with which the phrase roect
Gutenberg is associated is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  ou may copy it, give it away or
reuse it under the terms of the roect Gutenberg icense included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

...  If an individual roect Gutenbergtm electronic work is derived
from the public domain does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder, the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the nited States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase roect Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the reuirements of paragraphs ..
through .. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
roect Gutenbergtm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .. or
...

...  If an individual roect Gutenbergtm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .. through .. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the roect Gutenbergtm icense for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

...  o not unlink or detach or remove the full roect Gutenbergtm
icense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with roect Gutenbergtm.

...  o not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the roect
Gutenbergtm icense.

...  ou may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertet form.  owever, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a roect Gutenbergtm work in a format other than
lain anilla ASCII or other format used in the official version
posted on the official roect Gutenbergtm web site www.gutenberg.net,
you must, at no additional cost, fee or epense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of eporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
reuest, of the work in its original lain anilla ASCII or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full roect Gutenbergtm
icense as specified in paragraph ...

...  o not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any roect Gutenbergtm works
unless you comply with paragraph .. or ...

...  ou may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing roect Gutenbergtm electronic works provided
that

 ou pay a royalty fee of  of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of roect Gutenbergtm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the roect Gutenbergtm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     roect Gutenberg iterary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within  days following each date on which you
     prepare or are legally reuired to prepare your periodic ta
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the roect Gutenberg iterary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section , Information about donations to
     the roect Gutenberg iterary Archive Foundation.

 ou provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing or by email within  days of receipt that she
     does not agree to the terms of the full roect Gutenbergtm
     icense.  ou must reuire such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     roect Gutenbergtm works.

 ou provide, in accordance with paragraph .F., a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
     of receipt of the work.

 ou comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of roect Gutenbergtm works.

...  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a roect Gutenbergtm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the roect Gutenberg iterary Archive Foundation and Michael
art, the owner of the roect Gutenbergtm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section  below.

.F.

.F..  roect Gutenberg volunteers and employees epend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the roect Gutenbergtm
collection.  espite these efforts, roect Gutenbergtm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
efects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your euipment.

.F..  IMIT WARRANT, ISCAIMR F AMAGS  cept for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph .F., the roect
Gutenberg iterary Archive Foundation, the owner of the roect
Gutenbergtm trademark, and any other party distributing a roect
Gutenbergtm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and epenses, including legal
fees.   AGR TAT  A N RMIS FR NGIGNC, STRICT
IABIIT, BRAC F WARRANT R BRAC F CNTRACT CT TS
RI IN ARAGRA F.   AGR TAT T FNATIN, T
TRAMAR WNR, AN AN ISTRIBTR NR TIS AGRMNT WI NT B
IAB T  FR ACTA, IRCT, INIRCT, CNSNTIA, NITI R
INCINTA AMAGS N IF  GI NTIC F T SSIBIIT F SC
AMAG.

.F..  IMIT RIGT F RACMNT R RFN  If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money if any you paid for it by sending a
written eplanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written eplanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fi the problem.

.F..  cept for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .F., this work is provided to you ASIS WIT N TR
WARRANTIS F AN IN, RSS R IMI, INCING BT NT IMIT T
WARRANTIS F MRCANTIBIIT R FITNSS FR AN RS.

.F..  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the eclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maimum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

.F..  INMNIT  ou agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of roect Gutenbergtm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of roect Gutenbergtm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and epenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur a distribution of this or any roect Gutenbergtm
work, b alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
roect Gutenbergtm work, and c any efect you cause.


Section  .  Information about the Mission of roect Gutenbergtm

roect Gutenbergtm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middleaged and new computers.  It eists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

olunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching roect Gutenbergtms
goals and ensuring that the roect Gutenbergtm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In , the roect
Gutenberg iterary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for roect Gutenbergtm and future generations.
To learn more about the roect Gutenberg iterary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections  and 
and the Foundation web page at httpwww.pglaf.org.


Section .  Information about the roect Gutenberg iterary Archive
Foundation

The roect Gutenberg iterary Archive Foundation is a non profit
c educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted ta eempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundations IN or federal ta identification
number is .  Its c letter is posted at
httppglaf.orgfundraising.  Contributions to the roect Gutenberg
iterary Archive Foundation are ta deductible to the full etent
permitted by .S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations principal office is located at  Melan r. S.
Fairbanks, A, ., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
 North  West, Salt ake City, T ,  , email
businesspglaf.org.  mail contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundations web site and official
page at httppglaf.org

For additional contact information
     r. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief ecutive and irector
     gbnewbypglaf.org


Section .  Information about onations to the roect Gutenberg
iterary Archive Foundation

roect Gutenbergtm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of euipment including outdated euipment.  Many small donations
 to , are particularly important to maintaining ta eempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all  states of the nited
States.  Compliance reuirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these reuirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SN NATINS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit httppglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation reuirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning ta treatment of donations received from
outside the nited States.  .S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

lease check the roect Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  onations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit httppglaf.orgdonate


Section .  General Information About roect Gutenbergtm electronic
works.

rofessor Michael S. art is the originator of the roect Gutenbergtm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed roect
Gutenbergtm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


roect Gutenbergtm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as ublic omain in the .S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main G search facility

     httpwww.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about roect Gutenbergtm,
including how to make donations to the roect Gutenberg iterary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
