roect utenberg's The Mythology of the British Islands, by harles Squire

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  ou may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the roect utenberg icense included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the nited States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Mythology of the British Islands
       An Introduction to eltic Myth, egend, oetry, and omance

Author: harles Squire

elease Date: April ,  Book 

anguage: nglish

haracter set encoding: TF-

 STAT OF TIS OT TNB BOO MTOO 




roduced by MWS and the Online Distributed roofreading
Team at http:www.pgdp.net This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
ArchiveAmerican ibraries.






                          T MTOO OF T
                            BITIS ISANDS

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             T MTOO
                             OF T BITIS
                                ISANDS

                           AN INTODTION TO
                          TI MT, ND
                          OT, AND OMAN

                           B AS SI

                    ONDON: BAI AND SON IMITD
                     OD BAI, .. ASOW AND
                           DBIN        MM

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                FA


This book is what its author believes to be the only attempt yet made to
put the nglish reader into possession, in clear, compact, and what it
is hoped may prove agreeable, form, of the mythical, legendary, and
poetic traditions of the earliest inhabitants of our islands who have
left us written recordsthe aelic and the British elts. It is true
that admirable translations and paraphrases of much of aelic mythical
saga have been recently published, and that ady harlotte uests
translation of the Mabinogion has been placed within the reach of the
least wealthy reader. But these books not merely each cover a portion
only of the whole ground, but, in addition, contain little elucidatory
matter. Their characters stand isolated and uneplained; and the details
that would eplain them must be sought for with considerable trouble in
the lectures and essays of scholars to learned societies. The reader to
whom this literature is entirely new is introduced, as it were, to
numerous people of whose antecedents he knows nothing; and the effect is
often disconcerting enough to make him lay down the volume in despair.

But here he will at last make the formal acquaintance of all the chief
characters of eltic myth: of the aelic gods and the giants against
whom they struggled; of the hampions of the ed Branch of lster,
heroes of a martial epopee almost worthy to be placed beside the tale
of Troy divine; and of Finn and his Fenians. e will meet also with the
divine and heroic personages of the ancient Britons: with their earliest
gods, kin to the members of the aelic antheon; as well as with Arthur
and his nights, whom he will recognize as no mortal champions, but
belonging to the same mythic company. Of all these mighty figures the
histories will be briefly recorded, from the time of their unquestioned
godhood, through their various transformations, to the last doubtful,
dying recognition of them in the present day, as fairies. Thus the
volume will form a kind of handbook to a subect of growing
importancethe so-called eltic enaissance, which is, after all, no
moreand, indeed, no lessthan an endeavour to refresh the vitality of
nglish poetry at its most ancient native fount.

The book does not, of course, profess to be for eltic scholars, to
whom, indeed, its author himself owes all that is within it. It aims
only at interesting the reader familiar with the mythologies of reece,
ome, and Scandinavia in another, and a nearer, source of poetry. Its
authors wish is to offer those who have fallen, or will fall, under the
attraction of eltic legend and romance, ust such a volume as he
himself would once have welcomed, and for which he sought in vain. It is
his hope that, in choosing from the considerable, though scattered,
translations and commentaries of students of Old aelic and Old Welsh,
he has chosen wisely, and that his readers will be able, should they
wish, to use his book as a stepping-stone to the authorities themselves.
To that end it is wholly directed; and its marginal notes and short
bibliographical appendi follow the same plan. They do not aspire to
anything like completeness, but only to point out the chief sources from
which he himself has drawn.

To acknowledge, as far as possible, such debts is now the authors
pleasing duty. First and foremost, he has relied upon the volumes of M.
. dArbois de ubainvilles ours de ittrature celtique, and the
ibbert ectures for  of ohn hys, rofessor of eltic in the
niversity of Oford, with their sequel entitled Studies in the
Arthurian egend. From the writings of Mr. Alfred Nutt he has also
obtained much help. With regard to direct translations, it seems almost
superfluous to refer to ady harlotte uests Mabinogion and Mr. W.
F. Skenes Four Ancient Books of Wales, or to the work of such
well-known aelic scholars as Mr. ugene Ourry, Dr. uno Meyer, Dr.
Whitley Stokes, Dr. rnest Windisch, Mr. Standish ayes Orady to
mention no others, as contained in such publications as the evue
eltique, the Atlantis, and the Transactions of the Ossianic
Society, in Mr. Oradys Silva adelica, Mr. Nutts oyage of
Bran, Son of Febal, and Miss ulls uchullin Saga. But space is
lacking to do ustice to all. The reader is referred to the marginal
notes and the Appendi for the works of these and other authors, who
will no doubt pardon the use made of their researches to one whose sole
obect has been to gain a larger audience for the studies they have most
at heart.

Finally, perhaps, a word should be said upon that veed question, the
transliteration of aelic. As yet there is no universal or consistent
method of spelling. The author has therefore chosen the forms which
seemed most familiar to himself, hoping in that way to best serve the
uses of others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                ONTNTS


           A.                                          age

              I. T INTST AND IMOTAN OF TI
                   MTOO                                 

             II. T SOS OF O NOWD OF T
                   TI MTOO                          

            III. WO W T ANINT BITONS?            

             I. T IION OF T ANINT BITONS AND
                   DIDISM                                 


                   T AI ODS AND TI STOIS

              . T ODS OF T AS                      

             I. T ODS AI                            

            II. T IS OF T SN-OD                    

           III. T AI AONATS                       

             I. T WA WIT T IANTS                   

              . T ONST OF T ODS B MOTAS       

             I. T ODS IN I                         

            II. T IIS IIAD                           

           III. SOM AI O-STOIS                  

            I. FINN AND T FNIANS                      

             . T DIN AND FA OF T ODS          


                   T BITIS ODS AND TI STOIS

            I. T ODS OF T BITONS                   

           II. T ADNTS OF T ODS OF ADS       

          III. T WOOIN OF BANWN AND T BADIN
                   OF BN                                 

            I. T WA OF NANTMNTS                   

             . T ITOIS OF IT O DANSS      

            I. T MTOOIA OMIN OF AT       

           II. T TASS OF BITAIN                  

          III. T ODS AS IN ATS NITS         

           I. T DIN AND FA OF T ODS          


                    SIAS OF T TI AANISM

            . SIAS OF T TI AANISM INTO
                   MODN TIMS                            

                 ANDI                                  

                 IND                                     

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          T MTOO OF T
                            BITIS ISANDS




                               AT I

                 T INTST AND IMOTAN OF TI
                               MTOO


It should hardly be necessary to remind the reader of what profound
interest and value to every nation are its earliest legendary and
poetical records. The beautiful myths of reece form a sufficing
eample. In threefold manner, they have influenced the destiny of the
people that created them, and of the country of which they were the
imagined theatre. First, in the ages in which they were still fresh,
belief and pride in them were powerful enough to bring scattered tribes
into confederation. Secondly, they gave the inspiration to sculptor and
poet of an art and literature unsurpassed, if not unequalled, by any
other age or race. astly, when the glory that was reece had faded,
and her people had, by dint of successive invasions, perhaps even ceased
to have any right to call themselves ellenes, they have passed over
into the literatures of the modern world, and so given to reece herself
a poetic interest that still makes a petty kingdom of greater account in
the eyes of its compeers than many others far superior to it in etent
and resources.

This permeating influence of the reek poetical mythology, apparent in
all civilized countries, has acted especially upon our own. From almost
the very dawn of nglish literature, the reek stories of gods and
heroes have formed a large part of the stock-in-trade of nglish poets.
The inhabitants of Olympus occupy, under their better-known atin names,
almost as great a space in nglish poetry as they did in that of the
countries to which they were native. From haucer downwards, they have
captivated the imagination alike of the poets and their hearers. The
magic cauldron of classic myth fed, like the eltic rail, all who
came to it for sustenance.

At last, however, its potency became somewhat ehausted. Alien and
eotic to nglish soil, it degenerated slowly into a convention. In the
shallow hands of the poetasters of the eighteenth century, its figures
became mere puppets. With every wood a grove, and every rustic maid a
nymph, one could only epect to find enus armed with patch and
powder-puff, Mars shouldering a musket, and Apollo inspiring the
versifiers own trivial strains. The affectation killedand fortunately
killeda mode of epression which had become obsolete. Smothered by ust
ridicule, and abandoned to the commonplace vocabulary of the inferior
hack-writer, classic myth became a subect which only the greatest poets
could afford to handle.

But mythology is of such vital need to literature that, deprived of the
store of legend native to southern urope, imaginative writers looked
for a fresh impulse. They turned their eyes to the North. Inspiration
was sought, not from Olympus, but from Asgard. Moreover, it was believed
that the fount of primeval poetry issuing from Scandinavian and Teutonic
myth was truly our own, and that we were rightful heirs of it by reason
of the Anglo-Saon in our blood. And so, indeed, we are; but it is not
our sole heritage. There must also run much elticthat is, truly
Britishblood in our veins. And Matthew Arnold was probably right in
asserting that, while we owe to the Anglo-Saon the more practical
qualities that have built up the British mpire, we have inherited from
the eltic side that poetic vision which has made nglish literature the
most brilliant since the reek.

We have the right, therefore, to enter upon a new spiritual possession.
And a splendid one it is! The eltic mythology has little of the heavy
crudeness that repels one in Teutonic and Scandinavian story. It is as
beautiful and graceful as the reek; and, unlike the reek, which is the
reflection of a clime and soil which few of us will ever see, it is our
own. Divinities should, surely, seem the inevitable outgrowth of the
land they move in! ow strange Apollo would appear, naked among
icebergs, or fur-clad Thor striding under groves of palms! But the
eltic gods and heroes are the natural inhabitants of a British
landscape, not seeming foreign and out-of-place in a scene where there
is no vine or olive, but shading in with our homely oak and bracken,
gorse and heath.

Thus we gain an altogether fresh interest in the beautiful spots of our
own islands, especially those of the wilder and more mountainous west,
where the older inhabitants of the land lingered longest. Saon conquest
obliterated much in astern Britain, and changed more; but in the West
of ngland, in Wales, in Scotland, and especially in legend-haunted
Ireland, the hills and dales still keep memories of the ancient gods of
the ancient race. ere and there in South Wales and the West of ngland
are regionsonce mysterious and still romanticwhich the British elts
held to be the homes of gods or outposts of the Other World. In Ireland,
not only is there scarcely a place that is not connected in some way
with the traditionary eploits of the ed Branch hampions, or of Finn
and his mighty men, but the old deities are still remembered, dwarfed
into fairies, but keeping the same attributes and the same names as of
yore. Wordsworths complaint that, while elion and Ossa, Olympus and
arnassus are in immortal books enrolled, not one nglish mountain,
though round our sea-girt shore they rise in crowds, had been by the
elestial Muses glorified doubtless seemed true to his own generation.
Thanks to the scholars who have unveiled the ancient aelic and British
mythologies, it need not be so for ours. On udgate ill, as well as on
many less famous eminences, once stood the temple of the British eus. A
mountain not far from Bettws-y-oed was the British Olympus, the court
and palace of our ancient gods.

It may well be doubted, however, whether Wordsworths contemporaries
would have welcomed the mythology which was their own by right of birth
as a substitute for that of reece and ome. The inspiration of classic
culture, which Wordsworth was one of the first to break with, was still
powerful. ow some of its professors would have held their sides and
roared at the very notion of a British mythology! et, all the time, it
had long been secretly leavening nglish ideas and ideals, none the less
potently because disguised under forms which could be readily
appreciated. opular fancy had rehabilitated the old gods, long banned
by the priests bell, book, and candle, under various disguises. They
still lived on in legend as kings of ancient Britain reigning in a
fabulous past anterior to ulius aesarsuch were ing ud, founder of
ondon; ing ear, whose legend was immortalized by Shakespeare; ing
Brennius, who conquered ome; as well as many others who will be found
filling parts in old drama. They still lived on as long-dead saints of
the early churches of Ireland and Britain, whose wonderful attributes
and adventures are, in many cases, only those of their original
namesakes, the old gods, told afresh. And they still lived on in
another, and a yet more potent, way. Myths of Arthur and his cycle of
gods passed into the hands of the Norman story-tellers, to reappear as
romances of ing Arthur and his nights of the Table ound. Thus spread
over civilized urope, their influence was immense. Their primal poetic
impulse is still resonant in our literature; we need only instance
Tennyson and Swinburne as minds that have come under its sway.

This diverse influence of eltic mythology upon nglish poetry and
romance has been eloquently set forth by Mr. lton in his Origins of
nglish istory. The religion of the British tribes, he writes, has
eercised an important influence upon literature. The medival romances
and the legends which stood for history are full of the fair
humanities and figures of its bright mythology. The elemental powers of
earth and fire, and the spirits which haunted the waves and streams
appear again as kings in the Irish Annals, or as saints and hermits in
Wales. The nights of the ound Table, Sir ay and Tristrem and the bold
Sir Bedivere, betray their mighty origin by the attributes they retained
as heroes of romance. It was a goddess, Dea quaedam phantastica, who
bore the wounded Arthur to the peaceful valley. There was little
sunlight on its woods and streams, and the nights were dark and gloomy
for want of the moon and stars. This is the country of Oberon and of
Sir uon of Bordeau. It is the dreamy forest of Arden. In an older
mythology, it was the realm of a ing of Shadows, the country of wyn ap
Nudd, who rode as Sir uyon in the Fairie ueene

           And knighthood took of good Sir uons hand,
            When with ing Oberon he came to Fairyland.

To trace Welsh and Irish kings and saints and hermits back to the
elemental powers of earth and fire, and the spirits that haunted the
woods and streams of eltic imagination, and to disclose primitive
pagan deities under the medival and hristian trappings of ing
Arthurs nights will necessarily fall within the scope of this volume.
But meanwhile the reader will probably be asking what evidence there is
that apocryphal British kings like ear and ud, and questionable Irish
saints like Bridget are really disguised eltic divinities, or that the
Morte DArthur, with its love of auncelot and the queen, and its quest
of the oly rail, was ever anything more than an invention of the
Norman romance-writers. e will demand to know what facts we really
possess about this supposed eltic mythology alleged to have furnished
their prototypes, and of what real antiquity and value are our
authorities upon it.

The answer to his question will be found in the net chapter.

-----

Footnote :

  There is good ground to believe, writes Mr. . W. B. Nicholson,
  M.A., the librarian of the Bodleian ibrary, in the preface to his
  recently-published eltic esearches, that ancashire, West
  orkshire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire,
  eicestershire, utland, ambridgeshire, Wiltshire, Somerset, and part
  of Susse, are as eltic as erthshire and North Munster; that
  heshire, Shropshire, erefordshire, Monmouthshire, loucestershire,
  Devon, Dorset, Northamptonshire, untingdonshire, and Bedfordshire are
  more soand equal to North Wales and einster; while Buckinghamshire
  and ertfordshire eceed even this degree and are on a level with
  South Wales and lster. ornwall, of course, is more eltic than any
  other nglish county, and as much so as Argyll, Inverness-shire, or
  onnaught.

Footnote :

  The Study of eltic iterature.

Footnote :

  In a sonnet written in .

Footnote :

  lton: Origins of nglish istory, chap. .

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               AT II

                  T SOS OF O NOWD OF T
                            TI MTOO


We may begin by asserting with confidence that Mr. lton has touched
upon a part only of the material on which we may draw, to reconstruct
the ancient British mythology. uckily, we are not wholly dependent upon
the difficult tasks of resolving the fabled deeds of apocryphal Irish
and British kings who reigned earlier than St. atrick or before ulius
aesar into their original form of eltic myths, of sifting the
attributes and miracles of doubtfully historical saints, or of
separating the primitive pagan elements in the legends of Arthur and his
nights from the embellishments added by the romance-writers. We have,
in addition to thesewhich we may for the present put upon one side as
secondarysources, a mass of genuine early writings which, though
post-hristian in the form in which they now eist, none the less
descend from the preceding pagan age. These are contained in vellum and
parchment manuscripts long preserved from destruction in mansions and
monasteries in Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, and only during the last
century brought to light, copied, and translated by the patient labours
of scholars who have grappled with the long-obsolete dialects in which
they were transcribed.

Many of these volumes are curious miscellanies. sually the one book of
a great house or monastic community, everything was copied into it that
the scholar of the family or brotherhood thought to be best worth
preserving. ence they contain matter of the most diverse kind. There
are translations of portions of the Bible and of the classics, and of
such then popular books as eoffrey of Monmouths and Nennius istories
of Britain; lives of famous saints, together with works attributed to
them; poems and romances of which, under a thin disguise, the old aelic
and British gods are the heroes; together with treatises on all the
subects then studiedgrammar, prosody, law, history, geography,
chronology, and the genealogies of important chiefs.

The maority of these documents were put together during a period which,
roughly speaking, lasted from the beginning of the twelfth century to
the end of the siteenth. In Ireland, in Wales, and, apparently, also in
Scotland, it was a time of literary revival after the turmoils of the
previous epoch. In Ireland, the Norsemen, after long ravaging, had
settled peacefully down, while in Wales, the Norman onquest had
rendered the country for the first time comparatively quiet. The
scattered remains of history, lay and ecclesiastical, of science, and of
legend were gathered together.

Of the Irish manuscripts, the earliest, and, for our purposes, the most
important, on account of the great store of ancient aelic mythology
which, in spite of its dilapidated condition, it still contains, is in
the possession of the oyal Irish Academy. nluckily, it is reduced to a
fragment of one hundred and thirty-eight pages, but this remnant
preserves a large number of romances relating to the old gods and heroes
of Ireland. Among other things, it contains a complete account of the
epical saga called the Tin B huailgn, the aiding of the attle
of ooley, in which the hero, uchulainn, performed his greatest feats.
This manuscript is called the Book of the Dun ow, from the tradition
that it was copied from an earlier book written upon the skin of a
favourite animal belonging to Saint iaran, who lived in the seventh
century. An entry upon one of its pages reveals the name of its scribe,
one Maelmuiri, whom we know to have been killed by robbers in the church
of lonmacnois in the year .

Far more voluminous, and but little less ancient, is the Book of
einster, said to have been compiled in the early part of the twelfth
century by Finn mac orman, Bishop of ildare. This also contains an
account of uchulainns mighty deeds which supplements the older version
in the Book of the Dun ow. Of somewhat less importance from the point
of view of the student of aelic mythology come the Book of Ballymote
and the ellow Book of ecan, belonging to the end of the fourteenth
century, and the Books of ecan and of ismore, both attributed to the
fifteenth. Besides these si great collections, there survive many other
manuscripts which also contain ancient mythical lore. In one of these,
dating from the fifteenth century, is to be found the story of the
Battle of Moytura, fought between the gods of Ireland and their enemies,
the Fomors, or demons of the deep sea.

The Scottish manuscripts, preserved in the Advocates ibrary at
dinburgh, date back in some cases as far as the fourteenth century,
though the maority of them belong to the fifteenth and siteenth. They
corroborate the Irish documents, add to the uchulainn saga, and make a
more special subect of the other heroic cycle, that which relates the
not less wonderful deeds of Finn, Ossian, and the Fenians. They also
contain stories of other characters, who, more ancient than either Finn
or uchulainn, are the Tuatha D Danann, the god-tribe of the ancient
aels.

The Welsh documents cover about the same period as the Irish and the
Scottish. Four of these stand out from the rest, as most important. The
oldest is the Black Book of aermarthen, which dates from the third
quarter of the twelfth century; the Book of Aneurin, which was written
late in the thirteenth; the Book of Taliesin, assigned to the
fourteenth; and the ed Book of ergest, compiled by various persons
during that century and the one following it. The first three of these
Four Ancient Books of Wales are small in size, and contain poems
attributed to the great traditional bards of the sith century, Myrddin,
Taliesin, and Aneurin. The lastthe ed Book of ergestis far larger.
In it are to be found Welsh translations of the British hronicles; the
oft-mentioned Triads, verses celebrating famous traditionary persons or
things; ancient poems attributed to lywarch n; and, of priceless
value to any study of our subect, the so-called Mabinogion, stories in
which large portions of the old British mythology are worked up into
romantic form.

The whole bulk, therefore, of the native literature bearing upon the
mythology of the British Islands may be attributed to a period which
lasted from the beginning of the twelfth century to the end of the
siteenth. But even the commencement of this era will no doubt seem far
too late a day to allow authenticity to matter which ought to have
vastly preceded it. The date, however, merely marks the final redaction
of the contents of the manuscripts into the form in which they now
eist, without bearing at all upon the time of their authorship.
Avowedly copies of ancient poems and tales from much older manuscripts,
the present books no more fi the period of the original composition of
their contents than the presence of a portion of the anterbury Tales
in a modern anthology of nglish poetry would assign haucer to the
present year of grace.

This may be proved both directly and inferentially. In some
instancesas in that of an elegy upon Saint olumba in the Book of the
Dun owthe dates of authorship are actually given. In others, we may
depend upon evidence which, if not quite so absolute, is nearly as
convincing. ven where the writer does not state that he is copying from
older manuscripts, it is obvious that this must have been the case, from
the glosses in his version. The scribes of the earlier aelic
manuscripts very often found, in the documents from which they
themselves were copying, words so archaic as to be unintelligible to the
readers of their own period. To render them comprehensible, they were
obliged to insert marginal notes which eplained these obsolete words by
reference to other manuscripts more ancient still. Often the medival
copyists have ignorantly moved these notes from the margin into the
tet, where they remain, like philological fossils, to give evidence of
previous forms of life. The documents from which they were taken have
perished, leaving the medival copies as their sole record. In the Welsh
Mabinogion the same process is apparent. eculiarities in the eisting
manuscripts show plainly enough that they must have been copied from
some more archaic tet. Besides this, they are, as they at present
stand, obviously made up of earlier tales pieced together. Almost as
clearly as the aelic manuscripts, the Welsh point us back to older and
more primitive forms.

The ancient legends of the ael and the Briton are thus shown to have
been no mere inventions of scholarly monks in the Middle Ages. We have
now to trace, if possible, the date, not necessarily of their first
appearance on mens lips, but of their first redaction into writing in
approimately the form in which we have them now.

ircumstantial evidence can be adduced to prove that the most important
portions both of aelic and British early literature can be safely
relegated to a period of several centuries prior to their now-eisting
record. Our earliest version of the episode of the Tin B huailgn,
which is the nucleus and centre of the ancient aelic heroic cycle of
which uchulainn, fortissimus heros Scotorum, is the principal figure,
is found in the twelfth-century Book of the Dun ow. But legend tells us
that at the beginning of the seventh century the Saga had not only been
composed, but had actually become so obsolete as to have been forgotten
by the bards. Their leader, one Senchan Torpeist, a historical
character, and chief bard of Ireland at that time, obtained permission
from the Saints to call Fergus, uchulainns contemporary, and a chief
actor in the aid, from the dead, and received from the resurrected
hero a true and full version. This tradition, dealing with a real
personage, surely shows that the story of the Tin was known before
the time of Senchan, and probably preserves the fact, either that his
version of uchulainns famous deeds became the accepted one, or that he
was the first to reduce it to writing. An equally suggestive
consideration approimately fies for us the earliest redaction of the
Welsh mythological prose tales called the Mabinogion, or, more
correctly speaking, the Four Branches of the Mabinogi. In none of
these is there the slightest mention, or apparently the least knowledge,
of Arthur, around whom and whose supposed contemporaries centres the
mass of British legend as it was transmitted by the Welsh to the
Normans. These mysterious mythological records must in all probability,
therefore, antedate the Arthurian cycle of myth, which was already being
put into form in the sith century. On the other hand, the characters of
the Four Branches are mentioned without commentas though they were
personages with whom no one could fail to be familiarin the supposed
sith-century poems contained in those Four Ancient Books of Wales in
which are found the first meagre references to the British hero.

Such considerations as these throw back, with reasonable certainty, the
eistence of the Irish and Welsh poems and prose tales, in something
like their present shape, to a period antedating the seventh century.

But this, again, means only that the myths, traditions, and legends were
current at that to us early, but to them, in their actual substance,
late date, in literary form. A mythology must always be far older than
the oldest verses and stories that celebrate it. laborate poems and
sagas are not made in a day, or in a year. The legends of the aelic and
British gods and heroes could not have sprung, like Athena from the head
of eus, full-born out of some poets brain. The bard who first put them
into artistic shape was setting down the primitive traditions of his
race. We may therefore venture to describe them as not of the twelfth
century or of the seventh, but as of a prehistoric and immemorial
antiquity.

Internal evidence bears this out. An eamination of both the aelic and
British legendary romances shows, under embellishing details added by
later hands, an inner core of primeval thought which brings them into
line with the similar ideas of other races in the earliest stage of
culture. Their local colour may be that of their last editor, but
their plots are pre-medival, pre-hristian, pre-historic. The
characters of early aelic legend belong to the same stamp of
imagination that created Olympian and Titan, sir and tun. We must go
far to the back of civilized thought to find parallels to such a story
as that in which the British sun-god, struck by a rival in love with a
poisoned spear, is turned into an eagle, from whose wound great pieces
of carrion are continually failing.

This aspect of the eltic literary records was clearly seen, and
eloquently epressed, by Matthew Arnold in his Study of eltic
iterature. e was referring to the Welsh side, but his image holds
good equally for the aelic. The first thing that strikes one, he
says, in reading the Mabinogion is how evidently the medival
story-teller is pillaging an antiquity of which he does not fully
possess the secret: he is like a peasant building his hut on the site of
alicarnassus or phesus; he builds, but what he builds is full of
materials of which he knows not the history, or knows by a glimmering
tradition merely: stones not of this building, but of an older
architecture, greater, cunninger, more maestical. is heroes are no
medival personages: they belong to an older, pagan, mythological
world. So, too, with the figures, however euhemerized, of the three
great aelic cycles: that of the Tuatha D Danann, of the eroes of
lster, of Finn and the Fenians. Their divinity outshines their
humanity; through their masks may be seen the faces of gods.

et, gods as they are, they had taken on the semblance of mortality by
the time their histories were fied in the form in which we have them
now. Their earliest records, if those could be restored to us, would
doubtless show them eternal and undying, changing their shapes at will,
but not passing away. But the post-hristian copyists, whether Irish or
Welsh, would not countenance this. ence we have the singular parado of
the deaths of Immortals. There is hardly one of the figures of either
the aelic or the British antheon whose demise is not somewhere
recorded. sually they fell in the unceasing battles between the
divinities of darkness and of light. Their deaths in earlier cycles of
myth, however, do not preclude their appearance in later ones. Only,
indeed, with the closing of the lips of the last mortal who preserved
his tradition can the life of a god be truly said to end.

-----

Footnote :

  Satisfactory summaries of the evidence for the dates of both the
  aelic and Welsh legendary material will be found in pamphlets No. 
  and  of Mr. Nutts opular Studies in Mythology, omance, and
  Folklore.

Footnote :

  hys: Studies in the Arthurian egend, chap. I.

Footnote :

  See chap. I of this bookThe ods of the Britons.

Footnote :

  ecture II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT III

                    WO W T ANINT BITONS?


But, before proceeding to recount the myths of the Ancient Britons, it
will be well to decide what people, eactly, we mean by that loose but
convenient phrase. We have, all of us, vague ideas of Ancient Britons,
recollected, doubtless, from our school-books. There we saw their
pictures as, painted with woad, they paddled coracles, or drove scythed
chariots through legions of astonished omans. Their Druids,
white-bearded and wearing long, white robes, cut the mistletoe with a
golden sickle at the time of the full moon, or, less innocently
employed, made bonfires of human beings shut up in gigantic figures of
wicker-work.

Such picturesque details were little short of the sum-total, not only of
our own knowledge of the subect, but also of that of our teachers.
ractically all their information concerning the ancient inhabitants of
Britain was taken from the ommentaries of ulius aesar. So far as it
went, it was no doubt correct; but it did not go far. aesars interest
in our British ancestors was that of a general who was his own
war-correspondent rather than that of an ehaustive and painstaking
scientist. It has been reserved for modern archologists, philologists,
and ethnologists to give us a fuller account of the Ancient Britons.

The inhabitants of our islands previous to the oman invasion are
generally described as elts. But they must have been largely a mied
race; and the people with whom they mingled must have modified to
someand perhaps to a largeetent their physique, their customs, and
their language.

Speculation has run somewhat wild over the question of the composition
of the arly Britons. But out of the clash of rival theories there
emerges oneand one onlywhich may be considered as scientifically
established. We have certain proof of two distinct human stocks in the
British Islands at the time of the oman onquest; and so great an
authority as rofessor uley has given his opinion that there is no
evidence of any others.

The earliest of these two races would seem to have inhabited our islands
from the most ancient times, and may, for our purpose, be described as
aboriginal. It was the people that built the long barrows; and which
is variously called by ethnologists the Iberian, Mediterranean, Berber,
Basque, Silurian, or uskarian race. In physique it was short, swarthy,
dark-haired, dark-eyed, and long-skulled; its language belonged to the
class called amitic, the surviving types of which are found among the
allas, Abyssinians, Berbers, and other North African tribes; and it
seems to have come originally from some part either of astern,
Northern, or entral Africa. Spreading thence, it was probably the first
people to inhabit the alley of the Nile, and it sent offshoots into
Syria and Asia Minor. The earliest ellenes found it in reece under the
name of elasgoi; the earliest atins in Italy, as the truscans;
and the ebrews in alestine, as the ittites. It spread northward
through urope as far as the Baltic, and westward, along the Atlas
chain, to Spain, France, and our own islands. In many countries it
reached a comparatively high level of civilization, but in Britain its
development must have been early checked. We can discern it as an
agricultural rather than a pastoral people, still in the Stone Age,
dwelling in totemistic tribes on hills whose summits it fortified
elaborately, and whose slopes it cultivated on what is called the
terrace system, and having a primitive culture which ethnologists
think to have much resembled that of the present hill-tribes of Southern
India. It held our islands till the coming of the elts, who fought
with the aborigines, dispossessed them of the more fertile parts,
subugated them, even amalgamated with them, but certainly never
etirpated them. In the time of the omans they were still practically
independent in South Wales. In Ireland they were long unconquered, and
are found as allies rather than serfs of the aels, ruling their own
provinces, and preserving their own customs and religion. Nor, in spite
of all the successive invasions of reat Britain and Ireland, are they
yet etinct, or so merged as to have lost their type, which is still the
predominant one in many parts of the west both of Britain and Ireland,
and is believed by some ethnologists to be generally upon the increase
all over ngland.

The second of the two races was the eact opposite to the first. It was
the tall, fair, light-haired, blue- or gray-eyed, broad-headed people
called, popularly, the elts, who belonged in speech to the Aryan
family, their language finding its affinities in atin, reek, Teutonic,
Slavic, the end of Ancient ersia, and the Sanscrit of Ancient India.
Its original home was probably somewhere in entral urope, along the
course of the upper Danube, or in the region of the Alps. The round
barrows in which it buried its dead, or deposited their burnt ashes,
differ in shape from the long barrows of the earlier race. It was in a
higher stage of culture than the Iberians, and introduced into Britain
bronze and silver, and, perhaps, some of the more lately domesticated
animals.

Both Iberians and elts were divided into numerous tribes, but there is
nothing to show that there was any great diversity among the former. It
is otherwise with the elts, who were separated into two main branches
which came over at different times. The earliest were the oidels, or
aels; the second, the Brythons, or Britons. Between these two branches
there was not only a dialectical, but probably, also, a considerable
physical difference. Some anthropologists even postulate a different
shape of skull. Without necessarily admitting this, there is reason to
suppose a difference of build and of colour of hair. With regard to
this, we have the evidence of atin writersof Tacitus, who tells us
that the aledonians of the North differed from the Southern Britons
in being larger-limbed and redder-haired, and of Strabo, who
described the tribes in the interior of Britain as taller than the
aulish colonists on the coast, with hair less yellow and limbs more
loosely knit. qually do the classic authorities agree in recognizing
the Silures of South Wales as an entirely different race from any
other in Britain. The dark compleions and curly hair of these Iberians
seemed to Tacitus to prove them immigrants from Spain.

rofessor hys also puts forward evidence to show that the oidels and
the Brythons had already separated before they first left aul for our
islands. e finds them as two distinct peoples there. We do not
epect so much nowadays from the merest school-boy as we did in
Macaulays time, but even the modern descendant of that paragon could
probably tell us that all aul was divided into three parts, one of
which was inhabited by the Belgae, another by the Aquitani, and the
third by those who called themselves eltae, but were termed alli by
the omans; and that they all differed from one another in language,
customs, and laws. Of these, rofessor hys identifies the Belgae
with the Brythons, and the eltae with the oidels, the third people,
the Aquitani, being non-eltic and non-Aryan, part of the great
amitic-speaking Iberian stock. The eltae, with their oidelic
dialect of eltic, which survives to-day in the aelic languages of
Ireland, Scotland, and the Isle of Man, were the first to come over to
Britain, pushed forward, probably, by the Belgae, who, aesar tells us,
were the bravest of the auls. ere they conquered the native
Iberians, driving them out of the fertile parts into the rugged
districts of the north and west. ater came the Belgae themselves,
compelled by press of population; and they, bringing better weapons and
a higher civilization, treated the oidels as those had treated the
Iberians. Thus harried, the oidels probably combined with the Iberians
against what was now the common foe, and became to a large degree
amalgamated with them. The result was that during the oman domination
the British Islands were roughly divided with regard to race as follows:
The Brythons, or second eltic race, held all Britain south of the
Tweed, with the eception of the etreme west, while the first eltic
race, the oidelic, had most of Ireland, as well as the Isle of Man,
umberland, the West ighlands, ornwall, Devon, and North Wales. North
of the rampians lived the icts, who were probably more or less
oidelicized Iberians, the aboriginal race also holding out, unmied, in
South Wales and parts of Ireland.

It is now time to decide what, for the purposes of this book, it will be
best to call the two different branches of the elts, and their
languages. With such familiar terms as ael and Briton, aelic and
British, ready to our hands, it seems pedantic to insist upon the more
technical oidel and Brython, oidelic and Brythonic. The
difficulty is that the words ael and aelic have been so long
popularly used to designate only the modern oidels of Scotland and
their language, that they may create confusion when also applied to the
people and languages of Ireland and the Isle of Man. Similarly, the
words Briton and British have come to mean, at the present day, the
people of the whole of the British Islands, though they at first only
signified the inhabitants of ngland, entral Wales, the owlands of
Scotland, and the Brythonic colony in Brittany. owever, the words
oidel and Brython, with their derivatives, are so clumsy that it
will probably prove best to use the neater terms. In this volume,
therefore, the oidels of Ireland, Scotland, and the Isle of Man are
our aels and the Brythons of ngland and Wales are our Britons.

We get the earliest accounts of the life of the inhabitants of the
British Islands from two sources. The first is a foreign one, that of
the atin writers. But the omans only really knew the Southern Britons,
whom they describe as similar in physique and customs to the ontinental
auls, with whom, indeed, they considered them to be identical. At
the time they wrote, colonies of Belgae were still settling upon the
coasts of Britain opposite to aul. oman information grew scantier
as it approached the Wall, and of the Northern tribes they seem to have
had only such knowledge as they gathered through occasional warfare with
them. They describe them as entirely barbarous, naked and tattooed,
living by the chase alone, without towns, houses, or fields, without
government or family life, and regarding iron as an ornament of value,
as other, more civilized peoples regarded gold. As for Ireland, it
never came under their direct observation, and we are entirely dependent
upon its native writers for information as to the manners and customs of
the aels. It may be considered convincing proof of the authenticity of
the descriptions of life contained in the ancient aelic manuscripts
that they corroborate so completely the observations of the atin
writers upon the Britons and auls. eading the two side by side, we may
largely reconstruct the common civilization of the elts.

oughly speaking, one may compare it with the civilization of the
reeks, as described by omer. Both peoples were in the tribal and
pastoral stage of culture, in which the chiefs are the great
cattle-owners round whom their less wealthy fellows gather. Both wear
much the same attire, use the same kind of weapons, and fight in the
same mannerfrom the war-chariot, a vehicle already obsolete even in
Ireland by the first century of the hristian era. Battles are fought
single-handed between chiefs, the ill-armed common people contributing
little to their result, and less to their history. Such chiefs are said
to be divinely descendedsons, even, of the immortal gods. Their
tremendous feats are sung by the bards, who, like the omeric poets,
were privileged persons, inferior only to the war-lord. Ancient reek
and Ancient elt had very much the same conceptions of life, both as
regards this world and the net.

We may gather much detailed information of the early inhabitants of the
British Islands from our various authorities. Their clothes, which
consisted, according to the atin writers, of a blouse with sleeves,
trousers fitting closely round the ankles, and a shawl or cloak,
fastened at the shoulder with a brooch, were made either of thick felt
or of woven cloth dyed with various brilliant colours. The writer
Diodorus tells us that they were crossed with little squares and lines,
as though they had been sprinkled with flowers. They were, in fact,
like tartans, and we may believe arro, who tells us that they made a
gaudy show. The men alone seem to have worn hats, which were of soft
felt, the womens hair being uncovered, and tied in a knot behind. In
time of battle, the men also dispensed with any head-covering, brushing
their abundant hair forward into a thick mass, and dyeing it red with a
soap made of goats fat and beech ashes, until they looked says
iceros tutor osidonius, who visited Britain about  B.. less like
human beings than wild men of the woods. Both sees were fond of
ornaments, which took the form of gold bracelets, rings, pins, and
brooches, and of beads of amber, glass, and et. Their knives, daggers,
spear-heads, aes, and swords were made of bronze or iron; their shields
were the same round target used by the ighlanders at the battle of
ulloden; and they seem also to have had a kind of lasso to which a
hammer-shaped ball was attached, and which they used as the auchos of
South America use their bola. Their war-chariots were made of wicker,
the wooden wheels being armed with sickles of bronze. These were drawn
either by two or four horses, and were large enough to hold several
persons in each. Standing in these, they rushed along the enemys lines,
hurling darts, and driving the scythes against all who came within
reach. The omans were much impressed by the skill of the drivers, who
could check their horses at full speed on a steep incline, and turn
them in an instant, and could run along the pole, and stand on the yoke,
and then get back into their chariots again without a moments
delay.

With these accounts of the oman writers we may compare the picture of
the aelic hero, uchulainn, as the ancient Irish writers describe him
dressed and armed for battle. lorified by the bard, he yet wears
essentially the same costume and equipment which the classic historians
and geographers described more soberly. is gorgeous raiment that he
wore in great conventions consisted of a fair crimson tunic of five
plies and fringed, with a long pin of white silver, gold-enchased and
patterned, shining as if it had been a luminous torch which for its
blazing property and brilliance men might not endure to see. Net his
skin, a body-vest of silk, bordered and fringed all round with gold,
with silver, and with white bronze, which vest came as far as the upper
edge of his russet-coloured kilt.... About his neck were a hundred
linklets of red gold that flashed again, with pendants hanging from
them. is head-gear was adorned with a hundred mied carbuncle ewels,
strung. e carried a trusty special shield, in hue dark crimson, and
in its circumference armed with a pure white silver rim. At his left
side a long and golden-hilted sword. Beside him, in the chariot, a
lengthy spear; together with a keen, aggression-boding avelin, fitted
with hurling thong, with rivets of white bronze. Another passage of
aelic saga describes his chariot. It was made of fine wood, with
wicker-work, moving on wheels of white bronze. It had a high rounded
frame of creaking copper, a strong curved yoke of gold, and a pole of
white silver, with mountings of white bronze. The yellow reins were
plaited, and the shafts were as hard and straight as sword-blades.

In like manner the ancient Irish writers have made glorious the halls
and fortresses of their mythical kings. ike the palaces of riam, of
Menelaus, and of Odysseus, they gleam with gold and gems. onchobar,
the legendary ing of lster in its golden age, had three such houses
at main Macha. Of the one called the ed Branch, we are told that it
contained nine compartments of red yew, partitioned by walls of bronze,
all grouped around the kings private chamber, which had a ceiling of
silver, and bronze pillars adorned with gold and carbuncles. But the
far less magnificent accounts of the atin writers have, no doubt, more
truth in them than such lavish pictures. They described the Britons they
knew as living in villages of bee-hive huts, roofed with fern or thatch,
from which, at the approach of an enemy, they retired to the local
dn. This, so far from being elaborate, merely consisted of a round or
oval space fenced in with palisades and earthworks, and situated either
upon the top of a hill or in the midst of a not easily traversable
morass. We may see the remains of such strongholds in many parts of
nglandnotable ones are the castles of Amesbury, Avebury, and Old
Sarum in Wiltshire, Saint atherines ill, near Winchester, and Saint
eorges ill, in Surreyand it is probable that, in spite of the eltic
praisers of past days, the palaces of main Macha and of Tara were
very like them.

The eltic customs were, like the omeric, those of the primitive world.
All land though it may have theoretically belonged to the chief was
cultivated in common. This community of possessions is stated by
aesar to have etended to their wives; but the imputation cannot be
said to have been proved. On the contrary, in the stories of both
branches of the eltic race, women seem to have taken a higher place in
mens estimation, and to have enoyed far more personal liberty, than
among the omeric reeks. The idea may have arisen from a
misunderstanding of some of the curious eltic customs. Descent seems to
have been traced through the maternal rather than through the paternal
line, a very un-Aryan procedure which some believe to have been borrowed
from another race. The parental relation was still further lessened by
the custom of sending children to be brought up outside the family in
which they were born, so that they had foster-parents to whom they were
as much, or even more, attached than to their natural ones.

Their political state, mirroring their family life, was not less
primitive. There was no central tribunal. Disputes were settled within
the families in which they occurred, while, in the case of graver
inuries, the inured party or his nearest relation could kill the
culprit or eact a fine from him. As families increased in number, they
became petty tribes, often at war with one another. A defeated tribe had
to recognize the sovereignty of the head man of the conquering tribe,
and a succession of such victories ealted him into the position of a
chief of his district. But even then, though his decision was the whole
of the law, he was little more than the mouthpiece of public opinion.

-----

Footnote :

  uley: On Some Fied oints in British thnology. .

Footnote :

  Sergi: The Mediterranean ace.

Footnote :

  omme: The illage ommunity. hap. IThe non-Aryan lements in
  the nglish illage ommunity.

Footnote :

  Tacitus: Agricola, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Strabo: eographica, Book I, chap. .

Footnote :

  Tacitus, op. cit.

Footnote :

  hys: The arly thnology of the British Islands. Scottish eview.
  April, .

Footnote :

  aesar: De Bello allico, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  hys: Scottish eview. April, .

Footnote :

  Op. aesar, op. cit.

Footnote :

  Tacitus: Agricola, chap. I.

Footnote :

  aesar: De Bello allico, Book , chap. II.

Footnote :

  lton: Origins of nglish istory, chap. II.

Footnote :

  See a ivilisation des eltes et celle de lpope omrique, by
  M. dArbois de ubainville, ours de ittrature eltique, ol. I.

Footnote :

  See lton: Origins of nglish istory, chap. II.

Footnote :

  aesar: De Bello allico, Book I, chap. III.

Footnote :

  From the Tin B huailgn. The translator is Mr. Standish ayes
  Orady.

Footnote :

  Tochmarc mirethe Wooing of meran old Irish romance.

Footnote :

  Sometimes spelt onachar, and pronounced onhower or onnor.

Footnote :

  The Wooing of mer.

Footnote :

  aesar: De Bello allico, Book , chap. I, and various passages in
  Book II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., chap. I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               AT I

                T IION OF T ANINT BITONS AND
                                DIDISM


The ancient inhabitants of Britainthe aelic and British eltshave
been already described as forming a branch of what are roughly called
the Aryans. This name has, however, little reference to race, and
really signifies the speakers of a group of languages which can be all
shown to be connected, and to descend remotely from a single sourcea
hypothetical mother-tongue spoken by a hypothetical people which we term
Aryan, or, more correctly, Indo-uropean. This primeval speech,
evolved, probably, upon some part of the great plain which stretches
from the mountains of entral urope to the mountains of entral Asia,
has spread, superseding, or amalgamating with the tongues of other
races, until branches of it are spoken over almost the whole of urope
and a great portion of Asia. All the various atin, reek, Slavic,
Teutonic, and eltic languages are Aryan, as well as ersian and other
Asiatic dialects derived from the ancient end, and the numerous
Indian languages which trace their origin to Sanscrit.

Not very long ago, it was supposed that this common descent of language
involved a common descent of blood. A real brotherhood was
enthusiastically claimed for all the principal uropean nations, who
were also invited to recognize indus and ersians as their long-lost
cousins. Since then, it has been conceded that, while the Aryan speech
survived, though greatly modified, the Aryan blood might well have
disappeared, diluted beyond recognition by crossing with the other races
whom the Aryans conquered, or among whom they more or less peacefully
settled. As a matter of fact, there are no uropean nationsperhaps no
people at all ecept a few remote savage tribeswhich are not made up of
the most diverse elements. Aryan and non-Aryan long ago blended
inetricably, to form by their fusion new peoples.

But, ust as the Aryan speech influenced the new languages, and the
Aryan customs the new civilizations, so we can still discern in the
religions of the Aryan-speaking nations similar ideas and epressions
pointing to an original source of mythological conceptions. ence,
whether we investigate the mythology of the indus, the reeks, the
Teutons, or the elts, we find the same mythological groundwork. In
each, we see the powers of nature personified, and endowed with human
form and attributes, though bearing, with few eceptions, different
names. ike the edic brahmans, the reek and atin poets, and the Norse
scalds, the eltic bardswhether aels or Britonsimagined the sky, the
sun, the moon, the earth, the sea, and the dark underworld, as well as
the mountains, the streams and the woods, to be ruled by beings like
their own chiefs, but infinitely more powerful; every passion, as War
and ove, and every art, as oetry and Smithcraft, had its divine
founder, teacher, and eponent; and of all these deities and their
imagined children, they wove the poetical and allegorical romances which
form the subect of the present volume.

ike other nations, too, whether Aryan or non-Aryan, the elts had,
besides their mythology, a religion. It is not enough to tell tales of
shadowy gods; they must be made visible by sculpture, housed in groves
or temples, served with ritual, and propitiated with sacrifices, if one
is to hope for their favours. very cult must have its priests living by
the altar.

The priests of the elts are well-known to us by name as the Druidsa
word derived from a root D which signifies a tree, and especially the
oak, in several Aryan languages. This is generallythough not by all
scholarstaken as proving that they paid an especial veneration to the
king of trees. It is true that the mistletoethat strange parasite upon
the oakwas prominent among their herbs of power, and played a part in
their ritual; but this is equally true of other Aryan nations. By
the Norse it was held sacred to the god Balder, while the omans
believed it to be the golden bough that gave access to ades.

The accounts both of the atin and aelic writers give us a fairly
complete idea of the nature of the Druids, and especially of the high
estimation in which they were held. They were at once the priests, the
physicians, the wizards, the diviners, the theologians, the scientists,
and the historians of their tribes. All spiritual power and all human
knowledge were vested in them, and they ranked second only to the kings
and chiefs. They were freed from all contribution to the State, whether
by tribute or service in war, so that they might the better apply
themselves to their divine offices. Their decisions were absolutely
final, and those who disobeyed them were laid under a terrible
ecommunication or boycott. lassic writers tell us how they
lorded it in aul, where, no doubt, they borrowed splendour by imitating
their more civilized neighbours. Men of the highest rank were proud to
cast aside the insignia of mere mortal honour to oin the company of
those who claimed to be the direct mediators with the sky-god and the
thunder-god, and who must have resembled the ecclesiastics of medival
urope in the days of their greatest power, combining, like them,
spiritual and temporal dignities, and possessing the highest culture of
their age. et it was not among these Druids of aul, with their
splendid temples and vestments and their elaborate rituals, that the
metropolis of Druidism was to be sought. We learn from aesar that the
allic Druids believed their religion to have come to them, originally,
from Britain, and that it was their practice to send their theological
students across the hannel to learn its doctrines at their purest
source. To trace a cult backwards is often to take a retrograde
course in culture, and it was no doubt in Britainwhich liny the lder
tells us might have taught magic to ersiathat the sufficiently
primitive and savage rites of the Druids of aul were preserved in their
still more savage and primitive forms. It is curious corroboration of
this alleged British origin of Druidism that the ancient Irish also
believed their Druidism to have come from the sister island. Their
heroes and seers are described as only gaining the highest knowledge by
travelling to Alba. owever this may be, we may take it as certain
that this Druidism was the accepted religion of the eltic race.

ertain scholars look deeper for its origin, holding its dark
superstitions and savage rites to bear the stamp of lower minds than
those of the poetic and manly elts. rofessor hys inclines to see
three forms of religion in the British Islands at the time of the oman
invasion: the Druidism of the Iberian aborigines; the pure polytheism
of the Brythons, who, having come later into the country, had mied but
little with the natives; and the mingled Aryan and non-Aryan cults of
the oidels, who were already largely amalgamated with them. But
many authorities dissent from this view, and, indeed, we are not obliged
to postulate borrowing from tribes in a lower state of culture, to
eplain primitive and savage features underlying a higher religion. The
Aryan nations must have passed, equally with all others, through a
state of pure savagery; and we know that the religion of the reeks, in
many respects so lofty, sheltered features and legends as barbarous as
any that can be attributed to the elts.

Of the famous teaching of the Druids we know little, owing to their
habit of never allowing their doctrines to be put into writing. aesar,
however, roughly records its scope. As one of their leading dogmas, he
says, they inculcate this: that souls are not annihilated, but pass
after death from one body to another, and they hold that by this
teaching men are much encouraged to valour, through disregarding the
fear of death. They also discuss and impart to the young many things
concerning the heavenly bodies and their movements, the size of the
world and of our earth, natural science, and of the influence and power
of the immortal gods. The omans seem to have held their wisdom in
some awe, though it is not unlikely that the Druids themselves borrowed
whatever knowledge they may have had of science and philosophy from the
classical culture. That their creed of transmigration was not, however,
merely taken over from the reeks seems certain from its appearance in
the ancient aelic myths. Not only the shape-shifting common to the
magic stories of all nations, but actual reincarnation was in the power
of privileged beings. The hero uchulainn was urged by the men of lster
to marry, because they knew that his rebirth would be of himself,
and they did not wish so great a warrior to be lost to their tribe.
Another legend tells how the famous Finn mac oul was reborn, after two
hundred years, as an lster king called Mongan.

Such ideas, however, belonged to the metaphysical side of Druidism. Far
more important to the practical primitive mind are ritual and sacrifice,
by the due performance of which the gods are persuaded or compelled to
grant earths increase and length of days to men. Among the Druids, this
humouring of the divinities took the shape of human sacrifice, and that
upon a scale which would seem to have been unsurpassed in horror even by
the most savage tribes of West Africa or olynesia. The whole aulish
nation, says aesar, is to a great degree devoted to superstitious
rites; and on this account those who are afflicted with severe diseases,
or who are engaged in battles and dangers, either sacrifice human beings
for victims, or vow that they will immolate themselves, and these employ
the Druids as ministers for such sacrifices, because they think that,
unless the life of man be repaid for the life of man, the will of the
immortal gods cannot be appeased. They also ordain national offerings of
the same kind. Others make wicker-work images of vast size, the limbs of
which they fill with living men and set on fire.

We find evidence of similarly awful customs in pagan Ireland. Among the
oldest aelic records are tracts called Dinnsenchus, in which famous
places are enumerated, together with the legends relating to them. Such
topographies are found in several of the great Irish medival
manuscripts, and therefore, of course, received their final
transcription at the hands of hristian monks. But these ecclesiastics
rarely tampered with compositions in elaborate verse. Nor can it be
imagined that any monastic scribe could have invented such a legend as
this one which describes the practice of human sacrifice among the
ancient Irish. The poem which is found in the Books of einster, of
Ballymote, of ecan, and in a document called the ennes MS.
records the reason why a spot near the present village of Ballymagauran,
in ounty avan, received the name of Mag Slecht, the lain of
Adoration.

        ere used to be
         A high idol with many fights,
         Which was named the romm ruaich;
         It made every tribe to be without peace.

        Twas a sad evil!
         Brave aels used to worship it.
         From it they would not without tribute ask
         To be satisfied as to their portion of the hard world.

        e was their god,
         The withered romm with many mists,
         The people whom he shook over every host,
         The everlasting kingdom they shall not have.

        To him without glory
         They would kill their piteous, wretched offspring
         With much wailing and peril,
         To pour their blood around romm ruaich.

        Milk and corn
         They would ask from him speedily
         In return for one-third of their healthy issue:
         reat was the horror and the scare of him.

        To him
         Noble aels would prostrate themselves,
         From the worship of him, with many manslaughters,
         The plain is called Mag Slecht.

                                                

        They did evil,
         They beat their palms, they pounded their bodies,
         Wailing to the demon who enslaved them,
         They shed falling showers of tears.

                                                

        Around romm ruaich
         There the hosts would prostrate themselves;
         Though he put them under deadly disgrace,
         Their name clings to the noble plain.

        In their ranks stood
         Four times three stone idols;
         To bitterly beguile the hosts,
         The figure of the romm was made of gold.

        Since the rule
         Of erimon, the noble man of grace,
         There was worshipping of stones
         ntil the coming of good atrick of Macha.

        A sledge-hammer to the romm
         e applied from crown to sole,
         e destroyed without lack of valour
         The feeble idol which was there.

Such, we gather from a tradition which we may deem authentic, was human
sacrifice in early Ireland. According to the quoted verse, one third of
the healthy children were slaughtered, presumably every year, to wrest
from the powers of nature the grain and grass upon which the tribes and
their cattle subsisted. In a prose dinnsenchus preserved in the ennes
MS., there is a slight variant. Tis there, at Mag Slecht, it
runs, was the king idol of rin, namely the rom roich, and around him
were twelve idols made of stones, but he was of gold. ntil atricks
advent he was the god of every folk that colonized Ireland. To him they
used to offer the firstlings of every issue and the chief scions of
every clan. The same authority also tells us that these sacrifices were
made at alloween, which took the place, in the hristian calendar,
of the heathen SamhainSummers ndwhen the suns power waned, and
the strength of the gods of darkness, winter, and the underworld grew
great.

Who, then, was this bloodthirsty deity? is name, romm ruaich, means
the Bowed One of the Mound, and was evidently applied to him only
after his fall from godhead. It relates to the tradition that, at the
approach of the all-conquering Saint atrick, the demon fled from his
golden image, which thereupon sank forward in the earth in homage to the
power that had come to supersede it. But from another source we
glean that the word cromm was a kind of pun upon cenn, and that the
real title of the king idol of rin was enn ruaich, ead or
ord of the Mound. rofessor hys, in his eltic eathendom,
suggests that he was probably the aelic heaven-god, worshipped, like
the ellenic eus, upon high places, natural or artificial. At any
rate, we may see in him the god most revered by the aels, surrounded by
the other twelve chief members of their antheon.

It would appear probable that the eltic State worship was what is
called solar. All its chief festivals related to points in the suns
progress, the equinoes having been considered more important than the
solstices. It was at the spring equino called by the elts
Beltaine in every nineteenth year that, we learn from Diodorus
the Sicilian, a writer contemporary with ulius aesar, Apollo himself
appeared to his worshippers, and was seen harping and dancing in the sky
until the rising of the leiades. The other corresponding festival
was Samhain, the autumn equino. As Beltaine marked the beginning
of summer, so Samhain recorded its end. The summer solstice was also a
great eltic feast. It was held at the beginning of August in honour of
the god called ugus by the auls, ugh by the aels, and leu by the
Britonsthe pan-eltic Apollo, and, probably, when the cult of the
war-god had fallen from its early prominence, the chief figure of the
common antheon.

It was doubtless at Stonehenge that the British Apollo was thus seen
harping and dancing. That marvellous structure well corresponds to
Diodoruss description of a magnificent temple of Apollo which he
locates in the centre of Britain. It is a circular enclosure, he
says, adorned with votive offerings and tablets with reek inscriptions
suspended by travellers upon the walls. The rulers of the temple and
city are called Boread, and they take up the government from each
other according to the order of their tribes. The citizens are given up
to music, harping and chanting in honour of the sun. Stonehenge,
therefore, was a sacred religious centre, equally revered by and equally
belonging to all the British tribesa ome or erusalem of our ancient
paganism.

The same great gods were, no doubt, adored by all the elts, not only of
reat Britain and Ireland, but of ontinental aul as well. Sometimes
they can be traced by name right across the ancient eltic world. In
other cases, what is obviously the same personified power of nature is
found in various places with the same attributes, but with a different
title. Besides these, there must have been a multitude of lesser gods,
worshipped by certain tribes alone, to whom they stood as ancestors and
guardians. I swear by the gods of my people, was the ordinary oath of
a hero in the ancient aelic sagas. The aboriginal tribes must also have
had their gods, whether it be true or not that their religion influenced
the eltic Druidism. rofessor hys inclines to see in the genii
locorum, the almost nameless spirits of well and river, mountain and
woodshadowy remnants of whose cults survive to-day,members of a
swarming antheon of the older Iberians. These local beings would in
no way conflict with the great eltic nature-gods, and the two worships
could eist side by side, both even claiming the same votary. It needs
the stern faith of monotheism to deny the eistence of the gods of
others. olytheistic nations have seldom or never risen to such a
height. In their dealings with a conquered people, the conquerors
naturally held their own gods to be the stronger. Still, it could not be
denied that the gods of the conquered were upon their own ground; they
knew, so to speak, the country, and might have unguessed powers of doing
evil! What if, to avenge their worshippers and themselves, they were to
make the land barren and useless to the conquerors? So that conquering
pagan nations have usually been quite ready to stretch out the hand of
welcome to the deities of their new subects, to propitiate them by
sacrifice, and even to admit them within the pale of their own antheon.

This raises the question of the eact nationality of the gods whose
stories we are about to tell. Were they all Aryan, or did any of the
greater aboriginal deities climb up to take their place among the aelic
tribe of the goddess Danu, or the British children of the goddess Dn?
Some of the eltic gods have seemed to scholars to bear signs of a
non-Aryan origin. The point, however, is at present very obscure.
Neither does it much concern us. ust as the diverse deities of the
reekssome Aryan and ellenic, some pre-Aryan and elasgian, some
imported and Semiticwere all gathered into one great divine family, so
we may consider as members of one national Olympus all these gods whose
legends make up The Mythology of the British Islands.

-----

Footnote :

  See Schrader: rehistoric Antiquities of the Aryan eoples, pp. ,
  .

Footnote :

  A description of the Druidical cult of the mistletoe is given by
  liny: Natural istory, I, chap. .

Footnote :

  See Frazer: The olden Bough, chap. I.

Footnote :

  aesar: De Bello allico, Book I, chaps. III, I. But for a full
  eposition of what is known of the Druids the reader is referred to M.
  dArbois de ubainvilles Introduction  ltude de la ittrature
  eltique, ol. I of his ours de ittrature eltique.

Footnote :

  aesar: De Bello allico, Book I, chap. III.

Footnote :

  liny: Natural istory, .

Footnote :

  See chap. II, The Irish Iliad.

Footnote :

  hys: eltic Britain, chap. II. See also omme: thnology in
  Folk-lore, pp. -; illage ommunity, p. .

Footnote :

  Abundant evidence of this is contained in ausanias Description of
  reece.

Footnote :

  aesar: De Bello allico, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  The Wooing of mer.

Footnote :

  It is contained in the Book of the Dun ow, and has been translated or
  commented upon by ugene Ourry Manners and ustoms of the Ancient
  Irish, De ubainville ycle Mythologique Irlandais, and Nutt
  oyage of Bran.

Footnote :

  aesar: De Bello allico, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  The following translation was made by Dr. uno Meyer, and appears as
  Appendi B to Nutts oyage of Bran. Three verses, here omitted,
  will be found later as a note to chap. IIThe Irish Iliad.

Footnote :

  The first ing of the Milesians. The name is more usually spelt
  remon.

Footnote :

  The ennes Dinnsenchus has been translated by Dr. Whitley Stokes in
  ol. I of the evue eltique.

Footnote :

  Told in the Tripartite ife of Saint atrick, a fifteenth-century
  combination of three very ancient aelic MSS.

Footnote :

  The ibbert ectures for . ecture IIThe eus of the Insular
  elts.

Footnote :

  ronounced Baltinna.

Footnote :

  Diodorus Siculus: Book II, chap. III.

Footnote :

  ronounced Sowin.

Footnote :

  It has been suggested that this title is an attempt to reproduce the
  ancient British word for bards.

Footnote :

  Diodorus Siculus: Book II, chap. III.

Footnote :

  ibbert ectures, . ecture IThe aulish antheon.

Footnote :

  See hys: ectures on Welsh hilology, pp. , , .

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       T AI ODS AND TI
                                STOIS




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               AT 

                         T ODS OF T AS


Of the two eltic races that settled in our islands, it is the earlier,
the aels, that has best preserved its old mythology. It is true that we
have in few cases such detailed account of the aelic gods as we gain of
the ellenic deities from the reek poets, of the Indian Devas from the
ig eda, or of the Norse sir from the ddas. et none the less may we
draw from the ancient Irish manuscripts quite enough information to
enable us to set forth their figures with some clearness. We find them,
as might have been anticipated, very much like the divine hierarchies of
other Aryan peoples.

We also find them separated into two opposing camps, a division common
to all the Aryan religions. ust as the Olympians struggled with the
iants, the sir fought the tuns, and the Devas the Asuras, so there
is warfare in the aelic spiritual world between two superhuman hosts.
On one side are ranged the gods of day, light, life, fertility, wisdom,
and good; on the other, the demons of night, darkness, death,
barrenness, and evil. The first were the great spirits symbolizing the
beneficial aspects of nature and the arts and intelligence of man; the
second were the hostile powers thought to be behind such baneful
manifestations as storm and fog, drought and disease. The first are
ranged as a divine family round a goddess called Danu, from whom they
took their well-known name of Tuatha D Danann, Tribe or Folk
of the oddess Danu. The second owned allegiance to a female divinity
called Domnu; their king, Indech, is described as her son, and they are
all called Domnus gods. The word Domnu appears to have signified
the abyss or the deep sea, and the same idea is also epressed in
their better-known name of Fomors, derived from two aelic words
meaning under sea. The waste of water seems to have always
impressed the elts with the sense of primeval ancientness; it was
connected in their minds with vastness, darkness, and monstrous
birthsthe very antithesis of all that was symbolized by the earth, the
sky, and the sun.

Therefore the Fomors were held to be more ancient than the gods, before
whom they were, however, destined to fall in the end. Offspring of
haos and Old Night, they were, for the most part, huge and deformed.
Some had but one arm and one leg apiece, while others had the heads of
goats, horses, or bulls. The most famous, and perhaps the most
terrible of them all was Balor, whose father is said to have been one
Buarainech, that is, the cow-faced, and who combined in himself
the two classical rles of the yclops and the Medusa. Though he had two
eyes, one was always kept shut, for it was so venomous that it slew
anyone on whom its look fell. This malignant quality of Balors eye was
not natural to him, but was the result of an accident. rged by
curiosity, he once looked in at the window of a house where his fathers
sorcerers were preparing a magic potion, and the poisonous smoke from
the cauldron reached his eye, infecting it with so much of its own
deadly nature as to make it disastrous to others. Neither god nor giant
seems to have been eempt from its dangers; so that Balor was only
allowed to live on condition that he kept his terrible eye shut. On days
of battle he was placed opposite to the enemy, the lid of the destroying
eye was lifted up with a hook, and its gaze withered all who stood
before it. The memory of Balor and his eye still lingers in Ireland: the
eye of Balor is the name for what the peasantry of other countries
call the evil eye; stories are still told of Balar Beimann, or
Balor of the Mighty Blows; and Balors astle is the name of a
curious cliff on Tory Island. This island, off the coast of Donegal, was
the Fomorian outpost upon earth, their real abode being in the cold
depths of the sea.

This rule, however, as to the hideousness of the Fomors had its
eceptions. lathan, one of their chiefs, is described in an old
manuscript as of magnificent presencea Miltonic prince of darkness. A
man of fairest form, it says, with golden hair down to his shoulders.
e wore a mantle of gold braid over a shirt interwoven with threads of
gold. Five golden necklaces were round his neck, and a brooch of gold
with a shining precious stone thereon was on his breast. e carried two
silver spears with rivets of bronze, and his sword was golden-hilted and
golden-studded. Nor was his son less handsome. is name was Bress,
which means beautiful, and we are told that every beautiful thing in
Ireland, whether plain, or fortress, or ale, or torch, or woman, or
man, was compared with him, so that men said of them, that is a
Bress.

Balor, Bress, and lathan are the three Fomorian personages whose
figures, seen through the mists of antiquity, show clearest to us. But
they are only a few out of many, nor are they the oldest. We can learn,
however, nothing but a few names of any ancestors of the aelic giants.
This is equally true of the aelic gods. Those we know are evidently not
without parentage, but the names of their fathers are no more than
shadows following into oblivion the figures they designated. The most
ancient divinity of whom we have any knowledge is Danu herself, the
goddess from whom the whole hierarchy of gods received its name of
Tuatha D Danann. She was also called Anu or Ana, and her name still
clings to two well-known mountains near illarney, which, though now
called simply The aps, were known formerly as the aps of Ana.
She was the universal mother; well she used to cherish the gods, says
the commentator of a ninth-century Irish glossary. er husband is
never mentioned by name, but one may assume him, from British analogies,
to have been Bil, known to aelic tradition as a god of ades, a kind
of eltic Dis ater from whom sprang the first men. Danu herself
probably represented the earth and its fruitfulness, and one might
compare her with the reek Demeter. All the other gods are, at least by
title, her children. The greatest of these would seem to have been
Nuada, called Argetlm, or e of the Silver and. e was at once the
aelic eus, or upiter, and their war-god; for among primitive nations,
to whom success in war is all-important, the god of battles is the
supreme god. Among the auls, amulus, whose name meant
eaven, was identified by the omans with Mars; and other such
instances come readily to the mind. e was possessed of an invincible
sword, one of the four chief treasures of the Tuatha D Danann, over
whom he was twice king; and there is little doubt that he was one of the
most important gods of both the aels and the Britons, for his name is
spread over the whole of the British Isles, which we may surmise the
elts conquered under his auspices. We may picture him as a more savage
Mars, delighting in battle and slaughter, and worshipped, like his
aulish affinities, Teutates and esus, of whom the atin poet ucan
tells us, with human sacrifices, shared in by his female consorts, who,
we may imagine, were not more merciful than himself, or than that
aulish Taranis whose cult was no gentler than that of the Scythian
Diana, and who completes ucans triad as a fit companion to the
pitiless Teutates and the horrible esus. Of these warlike
goddesses there were fiveFea, the ateful, Nemon, the enomous,
Badb, the Fury, Macha, a personification of battle, and, over all of
them, the Morrg, or reat ueen. This supreme war-goddess of the
aels, who resembles a fiercer er, perhaps symbolized the moon, deemed
by early races to have preceded the sun, and worshipped with magical and
cruel rites. She is represented as going fully armed, and carrying two
spears in her hand. As with Ars and oseidon in the Iliad,
her battle-cry was as loud as that of ten thousand men. Wherever there
was war, either among gods or men, she, the great queen, was present,
either in her own shape or in her favourite disguise, that of a hoodie
or carrion crow. An old poem shows her inciting a warrior:

              Over his head is shrieking
                 A lean hag, quickly hopping
               Over the points of the weapons and shields;
                 She is the gray-haired Morrg.

With her, Fea and Nemon, Badb and Macha also hovered over the fighters,
inspiring them with the madness of battle. All of these were sometimes
called by the name of Badb. An account of the Battle of lontarf,
fought by Brian Boru, in , against the Norsemen, gives a gruesome
picture of what the aels believed to happen in the spiritual world when
battle lowered and mens blood was aflame. There arose a wild,
impetuous, precipitate, mad, ineorable, furious, dark, lacerating,
merciless, combative, contentious badb, which was shrieking and
fluttering over their heads. And there arose also the satyrs, and
sprites, and the maniacs of the valleys, and the witches and goblins and
owls, and destroying demons of the air and firmament, and the demoniac
phantom host; and they were inciting and sustaining valour and battle
with them. When the fight was over, they revelled among the bodies of
the slain; the heads cut off as barbaric trophies were called Machas
acorn crop. These grim creations of the savage mind had immense
vitality. While Nuada, the supreme war-god, vanished early out of the
antheonkilled by the Fomors in the great battle fought between them
and the godsBadb and the Morrg lived on as late as any of the aelic
deities. Indeed, they may be said to still survive in the superstitious
dislike and suspicion shown in all eltic-speaking countries for their
avatar, the hoodie-crow.

After Nuada, the greatest of the gods was the Dagda, whose name seems to
have meant the ood od. The old Irish tract called The hoice of
Names tells us that he was a god of the earth; he had a cauldron called
The ndry, in which everyone found food in proportion to his merits,
and from which none went away unsatisfied. e also had a living harp; as
he played upon it, the seasons came in their orderspring following
winter, and summer succeeding spring, autumn coming after summer, and,
in its turn, giving place to winter. e is represented as of venerable
aspect and of simple mind and tastes, very fond of porridge, and a
valiant consumer of it. In an ancient tale we have a description of his
dress. e wore a brown, low-necked tunic which only reached down to his
hips, and, over this, a hooded cape which barely covered his shoulders.
On his feet and legs were horse-hide boots, the hairy side outwards. e
carried, or, rather, drew after him on a wheel, an eight-pronged
war-club, so huge that eight men would have been needed to carry it; and
the wheel, as he towed the whole weapon along, made a track like a
territorial boundary. Ancient and gray-headed as he was, and sturdy
porridge-eater, it will be seen from this that he was a formidable
fighter. e did great deeds in the battle between the gods and the
Fomors, and, on one occasion, is even said to have captured
single-handed a hundred-legged and four-headed monster called Mata,
dragged him to the Stone of Benn, near the Boyne, and killed him
there.

The Dagdas wife was called Boann. She was connected in legend with the
iver Boyne, to which she gave its name, and, indeed, its very
eistence. Formerly there was only a well, shaded by nine magic
hazel-trees. These trees bore crimson nuts, and it was the property of
the nuts that whoever ate of them immediately became possessed of the
knowledge of everything that was in the world. The story is, in fact, a
aelic version of the ebrew myth of the Tree of the nowledge of ood
and vil. One class of creatures alone had this privilegedivine salmon
who lived in the well, and swallowed the nuts as they dropped from the
trees into the water, and thus knew all things, and appear in legend as
the Salmons of nowledge. All others, even the highest gods, were
forbidden to approach the place. Only Boann, with the proverbial womans
curiosity, dared to disobey this fied law. She came towards the sacred
well, but, as she did so, its waters rose up at her, and drove her away
before them in a mighty, rushing flood. She escaped; but the waters
never returned. They made the Boyne; and as for the all-knowing
inhabitants of the well, they wandered disconsolately through the depths
of the river, looking in vain for their lost nuts. One of these salmon
was afterwards eaten by the famous Finn mac oul, upon whom all its
omniscience descended. This way of accounting for the eistence of a
river is a favourite one in Irish legend. It is told also of the
Shannon, which burst, like the Boyne, from an inviolable well, to pursue
another presumptuous nymph called Sinann, a granddaughter of the sea-god
r.

The Dagda had several children, the most important of whom are Brigit,
Angus, Mider, Ogma, and Bodb the ed. Of these, Brigit will be already
familiar to nglish readers who know nothing of eltic myth. Originally
she was a goddess of fire and the hearth, as well as of poetry, which
the aels deemed an immaterial, supersensual form of flame. But the
early hristianizers of Ireland adopted the pagan goddess into their
roll of saintship, and, thus canonized, she obtained immense popularity
as Saint Bridget, or Bride.

Angus was called Mac Oc, which means the Son of the oung, or,
perhaps, the oung od. This most charming of the creations of the
eltic mythology is represented as a aelic ros, an eternally youthful
eponent of love and beauty. ike his father, he had a harp, but it was
of gold, not oak, as the Dagdas was, and so sweet was its music that no
one could hear and not follow it. is kisses became birds which hovered
invisibly over the young men and maidens of rin, whispering thoughts of
love into their ears. e is chiefly connected with the banks of the
Boyne, where he had a brugh, or fairy palace; and many stories are
told of his eploits and adventures.

Mider, also the hero of legends, would seem to have been a god of the
underworld, a aelic luto. As such, he was connected with the Isle of
Falgaa name for what was otherwise, and still is, called the Isle of
Manwhere he had a stronghold in which he kept three wonderful cows and
a magic cauldron. e was also the owner of the Three ranes of Denial
and hurlishness, which might be described flippantly as personified
gentle hints. They stood beside his door, and when anyone approached
to ask for hospitality, the first one said: Do not come! do not come!
and the second added: et away! get away! while the third chimed in
with: o past the house! go past the house! These three birds
were, however, stolen from Mider by Aitherne, an avaricious poet, to
whom they would seem to have been more appropriate than to their owner,
who does not otherwise appear as a churlish and illiberal deity. On
the contrary, he is represented as the victim of others, who plundered
him freely. The god Angus took away his wife tain, while his cows,
his cauldron, and his beautiful daughter Blathnat were carried off as
spoil by the heroes or demi-gods who surrounded ing onchobar in the
golden age of lster.

Ogma, who appears to have been also called ermait, that is, the
honey-mouthed, was the god of literature and eloquence. e married
tan, the daughter of Diancecht, the god of medicine, and had several
children, who play parts more or less prominent in the mythology of the
aelic elts. One of them was called Tuirenn, whose three sons murdered
the father of the sun-god, and were compelled, as epiation, to pay the
greatest fine ever heard ofnothing less than the chief treasures of the
world. Another son, airpr, became the professional bard of the
Tuatha D Danann, while three others reigned for a short time over the
divine race. As patron of literature, Ogma was naturally credited with
having been the inventor of the famous Ogam alphabet. This was an
indigenous script of Ireland, which spread afterwards to reat Britain,
inscriptions in ogmic characters having been found in Scotland, the Isle
of Man, South Wales, Devonshire, and at Silchester in ampshire, the
oman city of alleva Attrebatum. It was originally intended for
inscriptions upon upright pillar-stones or upon wands, the equivalents
for letters being notches cut across, or strokes made upon one of the
faces of the angle, the alphabet running as follows:

Illustration

When afterwards written in manuscript, the strokes were placed over,
under, or through a horizontal line, in the manner above; and the vowels
were represented by short lines instead of notches, as:

Illustration

A good eample of an ogmic inscription is given in rofessor hyss
ibbert ectures. It comes from a pillar on a small promontory near
Dunmore ead, in the west of erry, and, read horizontally, reads:

Illustration: , T SON OF T SON OF A DSNDANT OF
MODOINIA.

The origin of this alphabet is obscure. Some authorities consider it of
great antiquity, while others believe it entirely post-hristian. It
seems, at any rate, to have been based upon, and consequently to
presuppose a knowledge of, the oman alphabet.

Ogma, besides being the patron of literature, was the champion, or
professional strong man of the Tuatha D Danann. is epithet is
rianainech, that is, the Sunny-faced, from his radiant and shining
countenance.

The last of the Dagdas more important children is Bodb the ed, who
plays a greater part in later than in earlier legend. e succeeded his
father as king of the gods. e is chiefly connected with the south of
Ireland, especially with the altee Mountains, and with ough Dearg,
where he had a famous sdh, or underground palace.

The oseidon of the Tuatha D Danann antheon was called r, but we
hear little of him in comparison with his famous son, Manannn, the
greatest and most popular of his many children. Manannn mac ir was
the special patron of sailors, who invoked him as od of eadlands,
and of merchants, who claimed him as the first of their guild. is
favourite haunts were the Isle of Man, to which he gave his name, and
the Isle of Arran, in the Firth of lyde, where he had a palace called
mhain of the Apple-Trees. e had many famous weaponstwo spears
called ellow Shaft and ed avelin, a sword called The
etaliator, which never failed to slay, as well as two others known as
the reat Fury and the ittle Fury. e had a boat called
Wave-sweeper, which propelled and guided itself wherever its owner
wished, and a horse called Splendid Mane, which was swifter than the
spring wind, and travelled equally fast on land or over the waves of the
sea. No weapon could hurt him through his magic mail and breast-plate,
and on his helmet there shone two magic ewels bright as the sun. e
endowed the gods with the mantle which made them invisible at will, and
he fed them from his pigs, which, like the boar Shrimnir, in the Norse
alhalla, renewed themselves as soon as they had been eaten. Of these,
no doubt, he made his Feast of Age, the banquet at which those who ate
never grew old. Thus the people of the goddess Danu preserved their
immortal youth, while the ale of oibniu the Smith-od bestowed
invulnerability upon them. It is fitting that Manannn himself should
have been blessed beyond all the other gods with inehaustible life; up
to the latest days of Irish heroic literature his luminous figure shines
prominent, nor is it even yet wholly forgotten.

oibniu, the aelic ephaestus, who made the people of the goddess Danu
invulnerable with his magic drink, was also the forger of their weapons.
It was he who, helped by uchtain, the divine carpenter, and redn,
the divine bronze-worker, made the armoury with which the Tuatha D
Danann conquered the Fomors. qually useful to them was Diancecht, the
god of medicine. It was he who once saved Ireland, and was
indirectly the cause of the name of the iver Barrow. The Morrg, the
heaven-gods fierce wife, had borne a son of such terrible aspect that
the physician of the gods, foreseeing danger, counselled that he should
be destroyed in his infancy. This was done; and Diancecht opened the
infants heart, and found within it three serpents, capable, when they
grew to full size, of depopulating Ireland. e lost no time in
destroying these serpents also, and burning them into ashes, to avoid
the evil which even their dead bodies might do. More than this, he flung
the ashes into the nearest river, for he feared that there might be
danger even in them; and, indeed, so venomous were they that the river
boiled up and slew every living creature in it, and therefore has been
called Barrow boiling ever since.

Diancecht had several children, of whom two followed their fathers
profession. These were Miach and his sister Airmid. There were also
another daughter, tan, who married ermait or Ogma, and three other
sons called ian, eth, and u. ian married thniu, the daughter of
Balor the Fomor, and they had a son who was the crowning glory of the
aelic antheonits Apollo, the Sun-od,ugh, called
amhfada, which means the ong-handed, or the Far-shooter. It
was not, however, with the bow, like the Apollo of the reeks, but with
the rod-sling that ugh performed his feats; his worshippers sometimes
saw the terrible weapon in the sky as a rainbow, and the Milky Way was
called ughs hain. e also had a magic spear, which, unlike the
rod-sling, he had no need to wield, himself; for it was alive, and
thirsted so for blood that only by steeping its head in a
sleeping-draught of pounded poppy leaves could it be kept at rest. When
battle was near, it was drawn out; then it roared, and struggled against
its thongs; fire flashed from it; and, once slipped from the leash, it
tore through and through the ranks of the enemy, never tired of slaying.
Another of his possessions was a magic hound which an ancient poem,
attributed to the Fenian hero, aoilte, calls

            That hound of mightiest deeds,
             Which was irresistible in hardness of combat,
             Was better than wealth ever known,
             A ball of fire every night.

            Other virtues had that beautiful hound
             Better this property than any other property,
             Mead or wine would grow of it,
             Should it bathe in spring water.

This marvellous hound, as well as the marvellous spear, and the
indestructible pigs of Manannn were obtained for ugh by the sons of
Tuirenn as part of the blood-fine he eacted from them for the murder of
his father ian. A hardly less curious story is that which tells how
ugh got his name of the Ioldanach, or the Master of All Arts.

These are, of course, only the greater deities of the aelic antheon,
their divinities which answered to such ellenic figures as Demeter,
eus, er, ronos, Athena, ros, ades, ermes, ephaestus,
Aesculapius, and Apollo. All of them had many descendants, some of whom
play prominent parts in the heroic cycles of the ed Branch of lster
and of the Fenians. In addition to these, there must have been a
multitude of lesser gods who stood in much the same relation to the
great gods as the rank and file of tribesmen did to their chiefs. Most
of these were probably local deities of the various clansthe gods their
heroes swore by. But it is also possible that some may have been
divinities of the aboriginal race. rofessor hys thinks that he can
still trace a few of such Iberian gods by name, as Nt, i or oi, orb,
and Beth. But they play no recognizable part in the stories of the
aelic gods.

-----

Footnote :

  ronounced Tooha dae donnann.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, . ecture Iods, Demons, and eroes.

Footnote :

  Ibid.

Footnote :

  De ubainville: e ycle Mythologique Irlandais, chap. .

Footnote :

  De ubainville: ycle Mythologique Irlandais, chap. I.

Footnote :

  From the fifteenth-century arleian MS. in the British Museum,
  numbered , and called the Second Battle of Moytura.

Footnote :

  arleian MS. .

Footnote :

  In Munster was worshipped the goddess of prosperity, whose name was
  Ana, and from her are named the Two aps of Ana over uachair Degad.
  From oir Anmann, the hoice of Names, a siteenth-century tract,
  published by Dr. Whitley Stokes in Irische Tete.

Footnote :

  Attributed to ormac, ing-Bishop of ashel.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, The eus of the Insular elts.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, The aulish antheon.

Footnote :

  harsalia, Book I, l. , c.:

              t quibus immitis placatur sanguine diro
               Teutates, horrensque feris altaribus esus;
               t Taranis Scythicae non mitior ara Dianae.

Footnote :

  Iliad, Book .

Footnote :

  Op. cit., Book I.

Footnote :

  It commemorates the battle of Magh ath.

Footnote :

  The word is approimately pronounced Bive or Bibe.

Footnote :

  For a full account of these beings see a paper by Mr. W. M. ennessey
  in ol. I of the evue eltique, entitled The Ancient Irish oddess
  of War.

Footnote :

  De ubainville: e ycle Mythologique. hys: ibbert ectures, p.
  . The oir Anmann, however, translates it Fire of od.

Footnote :

  The Second Battle of Moytura. arleian MS. .

Footnote :

  The story is told in the Book of einster.

Footnote :

  Now called Trinity Well.

Footnote :

  See chap. IFinn and the Fenians.

Footnote :

  Book of einster. A paraphrase of the story will be found in Ourrys
  Manners and ustoms of the Ancient Irish, ol. II, p. .

Footnote :

  See chap. The Decline and Fall of the ods.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe ods in ile.

Footnote :

  See chap. IIIThe aelic Argonauts.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  ronounced Bove.

Footnote :

  rgenitive ir.

Footnote :

  ronounced Dianket. is name is eplained, both in the hoice of
  Names and in ormacs lossary, as meaning od of ealth.

Footnote :

  Standish Orady: The Story of Ireland, p. .

Footnote :

  ronounced uga or oo.

Footnote :

  ronounced avda.

Footnote :

  Translated by Ourry in Atlantis, ol. III, from the Book of
  ismore.

Footnote :

  hap. IIIThe aelic Argonauts.

Footnote :

  hap. IIThe ise of the Sun-od.

Footnote :

  hys: eltic Britain, chap. II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               AT I

                            T ODS AI


The people of the goddess Danu were not the first divine inhabitants of
Ireland. Others had been before them, dwellers in the dark backward and
abysm of time. In this the eltic mythology resembles those of other
nations, in almost all of which we find an old, dim realm of gods
standing behind the reigning antheon. Such were ronos and the Titans,
dispossessed by the eus who seemed, even to esiod, something of a
parvenu deity. aelic tradition recognizes two divine dynasties
anterior to the Tuatha D Danann. The first of these was called The
ace of artholon. Its head and leader cameas all gods and men came,
according to eltic ideasfrom the Other World, and landed in Ireland
with a retinue of twenty-four males and twenty-four females upon the
first of May, the day called Beltaine, sacred to Bil, the god of
death. At this remote time, Ireland consisted of only one treeless,
grassless plain, watered by three lakes and nine rivers. But, as the
race of artholon increased, the land stretched, or widened, under
themsome said miraculously, and others, by the labours of artholons
people. At any rate, during the three hundred years they dwelt there, it
grew from one plain to four, and acquired seven new lakes; which was
fortunate, for the race of artholon increased from forty-eight members
to five thousand, in spite of battles with the Fomors.

These would seem to have been inevitable. Whatever gods ruled, they
found themselves in eternal opposition to the not-godsthe powers of
darkness, winter, evil, and death. The race of artholon warred against
them with success. At the lain of Ith, artholon defeated their leader,
a gigantic demon called ichol the Footless, and dispersed his deformed
and monstrous host. After this there was quiet for three hundred years.
Thenupon the same fatal first of Maythere began a mysterious epidemic,
which lasted a week, and destroyed them all. In premonition of their
end, they foregathered upon the original, first-created plainthen
called Sen Mag, or the Old lain,so that those who survived might
the more easily bury those that died. Their funeral-place is still
marked by a mound near Dublin, called Tallaght in the maps, but
formerly known as Tamlecht Muintre artholain, the lague-grave of
artholons eople. This would seem to have been a development of the
very oldest form of the legendwhich knew nothing of a plague, but
merely represented the people of artholon as having returned, after
their soourn in Ireland, to the other world, whence they cameand is
probably due to the gradual euhemerization of the ancient gods into
ancient men.

Following the race of artholon, came the race of Nemed, which carried
on the work and traditions of its forerunner. During its time, Ireland
again enlarged herself, to the etent of twelve new plains and four more
lakes. ike the people of artholon, the race of Nemed struggled with
the Fomors, and defeated them in four consecutive battles. Then Nemed
died, with two thousand of his people, from an epidemic, and the
remnant, left without their leader, were terribly oppressed by the
Fomors. Two Fomorian kingsMorc, son of Dela, and onann, son of
Febarhad built a tower of glass upon Tory Island, always their chief
stronghold, and where stories of them still linger, and from this
vantage-point they dictated a ta which recalls that paid, in reek
story, to the retan Minotaur. Two-thirds of the children born to the
race of Nemed during the year were to be delivered up on each day of
Samhain. oaded by this to a last desperate effort, the survivors of
Nemeds people attacked the tower, and took it, onann perishing in the
struggle. But their triumph was short. Morc, the other king, collected
his forces, and inflicted such a slaughter upon the people of Nemed
that, out of the siteen thousand who had assembled for the storming of
the tower, only thirty survived. And these returned whence they came, or
diedthe two acts being, mythologically speaking, the same.

One cannot help seeing a good deal of similarity between the stories of
these two mythical invasions of Ireland. specially noticeable is the
account of the epidemic which destroyed all artholons people and
nearly all of Nemeds. ence it has been held that the two legends are
duplicates, and that there was at first only one, which has been adapted
somewhat differently by two races, the Iberians and the aels. rofessor
hys considers the account of Nemed to have been the original eltic
one, and the artholon story, the version of it which the native races
made to please themselves. The name artholon, with its initial p,
is entirely foreign to the genius of aelic speech. Moreover, artholon
himself is given, by the early chroniclers, ancestors whose decidedly
non-Aryan names reappear afterwards as the names of Fir Bolg chiefs.
Nemed was later than artholon in Ireland, as the aels, or Milesians,
were later than the Iberians, or Fir Bolgs.

These Fir Bolgs are found in myth as the net colonizers of Ireland.
arying traditions say that they came from reece, or from Spainwhich
was a post-hristian euphemism for the eltic ades. They consisted
of three tribes, called the Fir Domnann or Men of Domnu, the Fir
aillion or Men of aillion, and the Fir Bolg or Men of Bolg;
but, in spite of the fact that the first-named tribe was the most
important, they are usually called collectively after the last. urious
stories are told of their life in reece, and how they came to Ireland;
but these are somewhat factitious, and obviously do not belong to the
earliest tradition.

In the time of their domination they had, we are told, partitioned
Ireland among them: the Fir Bolg held lster; the Fir Domnann, divided
into three kingdoms, occupied North Munster, South Munster, and
onnaught; while the Fir aillion owned einster. These five provinces
met at a hill then called Balors ill, but afterwards the ill of
isnech. It is near athconrath, in the county of West Meath, and was
believed, in early times, to mark the eact centre of Ireland. They held
the country from the departure of the people of Nemed to the coming of
the people of the goddess Danu, and during this period they had nine
supreme kings. At the time of the arrival of the gods, their kings name
was ochaid son of rc, surnamed The roud.

We have practically no other details regarding their life in Ireland. It
is obvious, however, that they were not really gods, but the pre-Aryan
race which the aels, when they landed in Ireland, found already in
occupation. There are many instances of peoples at a certain stage of
culture regarding tribes in a somewhat lower one as semi-divine, or,
rather, half-diabolical. The suspicion and fear with which the early
elts must have regarded the savage aborigines made them seem larger
than human. They feared them for the weird magical rites which they
practised in their inaccessible forts among the hills, amid storms and
mountain mists. The aels, who held themselves to be the children of
light, deemed these dark Iberians children of the dark. Their tribal
names seem to have been, in several instances, founded upon this idea.
There were the orca-Oidce eople of Darkness and the
orca-Duibhne eople of the Night. The territory of the western
tribe of the i Dorchaide Sons of Dark was called the Night
ountry. The elts, who held their own gods to have preceded them
into Ireland, would not believe that even the Tuatha D Danann could
have wrested the land from these magic-skilled Iberians without battle.

They seem also to have been considered as in some way connected with the
Fomors. ust as the largest Iberian tribe was called the Men of Domnu,
so the Fomors were called the ods of Domnu, and Indech, one of their
kings, is a son of Domnu. Thus eternal battle between the gods,
children of Danu, and the giants, children of Domnu, would reflect, in
the supernatural world, the perpetual warfare between invading elt and
resisting Iberian. It is shadowed, too, in the later heroic cycle. The
champions of lster, Aryans and aels par ecellence, have no such
bitter enemies as the Fir Domnann of Munster and the Fir aillion of
einster. A few scholars would even see in the later death-struggle
between the igh ing of Ireland and his rebellious Fenians the last
historic or mythological adumbration of racial war.

The enemies alike of Fir Bolg and Fomor, the Tuatha D Danann, gods of
the aels, were the net to arrive. What is probably the earliest
account tells us that they came from the sky. ater versions, however,
give them a habitation upon earthsome say in the north, others in the
southern isles of the world. They had dwelt in four mythical cities
called Findias, orias, Murias, and Falias, where they had learned
poetry and magicto the primitive mind two not very dissimilar
thingsand whence they had brought to Ireland their four chief
treasures. From Findias came Nuadas sword, from whose stroke no one
ever escaped or recovered; from orias, ughs terrible lance; from
Murias, the Dagdas cauldron; and from Falias, the Stone of Fl, better
known as the Stone of Destiny, which afterwards fell into the hands of
the early kings of Ireland. According to legend, it had the magic
property of uttering a human cry when touched by the rightful ing of
rin. Some have recognized in this marvellous stone the same rude block
which dward I brought from Scone in the year , and placed in
Westminster Abbey, where it now forms part of the oronation hair. It
is a curious fact that, while Scottish legend asserts this stone to have
come to Scotland from Ireland, Irish legend should also declare that it
was taken from Ireland to Scotland. This would sound like conclusive
evidence, but it is none the less held by leading modern
archologistsincluding Dr. W. F. Skene, who has published a monograph
on the subectthat the Stone of Scone and the Stone of Tara were
never the same. Dr. etrie identifies the real ia Fil with a stone
which has always remained in Ireland, and which was removed from its
original position on Tara ill, in , to mark the tomb of the rebels
buried close by under a mound now known as the roppies grave.

Whether the Tuatha D Danann came from earth or heaven, they landed in a
dense cloud upon the coast of Ireland on the mystic first of May without
having been opposed, or even noticed by the people whom it will be
convenient to follow the manuscript authorities in calling the Fir
Bolgs. That those might still be ignorant of their coming, the
Morrg, helped by Badb and Macha, made use of the magic they had
learned in Findias, orias, Murias, and Falias. They spread
druidically-formed showers and fog-sustaining shower-clouds over the
country, and caused the air to pour down fire and blood upon the Fir
Bolgs, so that they were obliged to shelter themselves for three days
and three nights. But the Fir Bolgs had druids of their own, and, in the
end, they put a stop to these enchantments by counter-spells, and the
air grew clear again.

The Tuatha D Danann, advancing westward, had reached a place called the
lain of the Sea, in einster, when the two armies met. ach sent out
a warrior to parley. The two adversaries approached each other
cautiously, their eyes peeping over the tops of their shields. Then,
coming gradually nearer, they spoke to one another, and the desire to
eamine each others weapons made them almost friends.

The envoy of the Fir Bolgs looked with wonder at the
beautifully-shaped, thin, slender, long, sharp-pointed spears of the
warrior of the Tuatha D Danann, while the ambassador of the tribe of
the goddess Danu was not less impressed by the lances of the Fir Bolgs,
which were heavy, thick, pointless, but sharply-rounded. They agreed
to echange weapons, so that each side might, by an eamination of them,
be able to come to some opinion as to its opponents strength. Before
parting, the envoy of the Tuatha D Danann offered the Fir Bolgs,
through their representative, peace, with a division of the country into
two equal halves.

The Fir Bolg envoy advised his people to accept this offer. But their
king, ochaid, son of rc, would not. If we once give these people
half, he said, they will soon have the whole.

The people of the goddess Danu were, on the other hand, very much
impressed by the sight of the Fir Bolgs weapons. They decided to secure
a more advantageous position, and, retreating farther west into
onnaught, to a plain then called Nia, but now Moytura, near the present
village of ong, they drew up their line at its etreme end, in front of
the pass of Balgatan, which offered a retreat in case of defeat.

The Fir Bolgs followed them, and encamped on the nearer side of the
plain. Then Nuada, ing of the Tuatha D Danann, sent an ambassador
offering the same terms as before. Again the Fir Bolgs declined them.

Then when, asked the envoy, do you intend to give battle?

We must have a truce, they said, for we want time to repair our
armour, burnish our helmets, and sharpen our swords. Besides, we must
have spears like yours made for us, and you must have spears like ours
made for you.

The result of this chivalrous, but, to modern ideas, amazing, parley was
that a truce of one hundred and five days was agreed upon.

It was on Midsummer Day that the opposing armies at last met. The people
of the goddess Danu appeared in a flaming line, wielding their
red-bordered, speckled, and firm shields. Opposite to them were ranged
the Fir Bolgs, sparkling, brilliant, and flaming, with their swords,
spears, blades, and trowel-spears. The proceedings began with a kind of
deadly hurley-match, in which thrice nine of the Tuatha D Danann played
the same number of the Fir Bolgs, and were defeated and killed. Then
followed another parley, to decide how the battle should be carried on,
whether there should be fighting every day or only on every second day.
Moreover, Nuada obtained from ochaid an assurance that the battles
should always be fought with equal numbers, although this was, we are
told, very disagreeable to the Fir Bolg king, because he had largely
the advantage in the numbers of his army. Then warfare recommenced with
a series of single combats, like those of the reeks and Troans in the
Iliad. At the end of each day the conquerors on both sides went back
to their camps, and were refreshed by being bathed in healing baths of
medicinal herbs.

So the fight went on for four days, with terrible slaughter upon each
side. A Fir Bolg champion called Sreng fought in single combat with
Nuada, the ing of the ods, and shore off his hand and half his shield
with one terrific blow. ochaid, the ing of the Fir Bolgs, was even
less fortunate than Nuada; for he lost his life. Suffering terribly from
thirst, he went, with a hundred of his men, to look for water, and was
followed, and pursued as far as the strand of Ballysadare, in Sligo.
ere he turned to bay, but was killed, his grave being still marked by a
tumulus. The Fir Bolgs, reduced at last to three hundred men, demanded
single combat until all upon one side were slain. But, sooner than
consent to this, the Tuatha D Danann offered them a fifth part of
Ireland, whichever province they might choose. They agreed, and chose
onnaught, ever afterwards their especial home, and where, until the
middle of the seventeenth century, men were still found tracing their
descent from Sreng.

The whole story has a singularly historical, curiously unmythological
air about it, which contrasts strangely with the account of the other
battle of the same name which the Tuatha D Danann waged afterwards with
the Fomors. The neighbourhood of ong still preserves both relics and
traditions of the fight. pon the plain of Southern Moytura as it is
called, to distinguish it from the Northern Moytura of the second
battle are many circles and tumuli. These circles are especially
numerous near the village itself; and it is said that there were
formerly others, which have been used for making walls and dykes. arge
cairns of stones, too, are scattered over what was certainly once the
scene of a great battle. These various prehistoric monuments each
have their still-told story; and Sir William Wilde, as he relates in his
ough orrib, was so impressed by the unepected agreement
between the details of the legendary battle, as he read them in the
ancient manuscript, and the traditions still attaching to the mounds,
circles, and cairns, that he tells us he could not help coming to the
conclusion that the account was absolutely historical. ertainly the
coincidences are curious. is opinion was that the Fir Bolgs were a
colony of Belg, and that the Tuatha D Danann were Danes. But the
people of the goddess Danu are too obviously mythical to make it worth
while to seek any standing-ground for them in the world of reality. In
their superhuman attributes, they are quite different from the Fir
Bolgs. In the epical cycle it is made as clear that the Tuatha D Danann
are divine beings as it is that the Fir Bolg, the Fir Domnann, and the
Fir aillion stand on eactly the same footing as the men of lster.
ater history records by what Milesian kings and on what terms of
rack-rent the three tribes were allowed settlements in other parts of
Ireland than their native onnaught. They appear in ancient, medival,
and almost modern chronicles as the old race of the land. The truth
seems to be that the whole story of the war between the gods and the Fir
Bolgs is an invention of comparatively late times. In the earliest
documents there is only one battle of Moytura, fought between the people
of the goddess Danu and the Fomors. The idea of doubling it seems to
date from after the eleventh century; and its inventor may very
well have used the legends concerning this battle-field, where two
unknown armies had fought in days gone by, in compiling his story. It
never belonged to the same genuine mythological stratum as the legend of
the original battle fought by the Tuatha D Danann, the gods of the
aels, against the Fomors, the gods of the Iberians.

-----

Footnote :

  De ubainville: ycle Mythologique, chap. .

Footnote :

  hys: The Mythographical Treatment of eltic thnology, Scottish
  eview, Oct. .

Footnote :

  De ubainville: ycle Mythologique, chap. . hys: ibbert
  ectures, pp. , .

Footnote :

  ronounced cca or ohee.

Footnote :

  omme: thnology in Folklore, chap. IIIThe Mythic Influence of a
  onquered ace.

Footnote :

  lton: Origins of nglish istory, note to p. .

Footnote :

  It has been contended that the Fenians were originally the gods or
  heroes of an aboriginal people in Ireland, the myths about them
  representing the pre-eltic and pre-Aryan ideal, as the sagas of the
  ed Branch of lster embodied that of the eltic Aryans. The question,
  however, is as yet far from being satisfactorily solved.

Footnote :

  The oronation Stone, by William Forbes Skene.

Footnote :

  See istory and Antiquities of Tara ill.

Footnote :

  Our authorities for the details of this war between the Tuatha D
  Danann and the Fir Bolgs are the opening verses of the arleian MS.
  , as translated by Stokes and De ubainville, and ugene Ourrys
  translations, in his MS. Materials of Ancient Irish istory and his
  Manners and ustoms of the Ancient Irish, from a manuscript
  preserved at Trinity ollege, Dublin.

Footnote :

  Now called Benlevi.

Footnote :

  See Dr. ames Fergusson: ude Stone Monuments, pp. -.

Footnote :

  ough orrib, Its Shores and Islands, by Sir William . Wilde, chap.
  III.

Footnote :

  De ubainville: ycle Mythologique Irlandais, p. .

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT II

                      T IS OF T SN-OD


It was as a result of the loss of his hand in this battle with the Fir
Bolgs that Nuada got his name of Argetlm, that is, the Silver
anded. For Diancecht, the physician of the Tuatha D Danann, made him
an artificial hand of silver, so skilfully that it moved in all its
oints, and was as strong and supple as a real one. But, good as it was
of its sort, it was a blemish; and, according to eltic custom, no
maimed person could sit upon the throne. Nuada was deposed; and the
Tuatha D Danann went into council to appoint a new king.

They agreed that it would be a politic thing for them to conciliate the
Fomors, the giants of the sea, and make an alliance with them. So they
sent a message to Bress, the son of the Fomorian king, lathan, asking
him to come and rule over them. Bress accepted this offer; and they made
a marriage between him and Brigit, the daughter of the Dagda. At the
same time, ian, the son of Diancecht, the physician of the Tuatha
D Danann, married thniu, the daughter of the Fomor, Balor. Then Bress
was made king, and endowed with lands and a palace; and he, on his part,
gave hostages that he would abdicate if his rule ever became unpleasing
to those who had elected him.

But, in spite of all his fair promises, Bress, who belonged in heart to
his own fierce people, began to oppress his subects with ecessive
taes. e put a ta upon every hearth, upon every kneading-trough, and
upon every quern, as well as a poll-ta of an ounce of gold upon every
member of the Tuatha D Danann. By a crafty trick, too, he obtained the
milk of all their cattle. e asked at first only for the produce of any
cows which happened to be brown and hairless, and the people of the
goddess Danu granted him this cheerfully. But Bress passed all the
cattle in Ireland between two fires, so that their hair was singed off,
and thus obtained the monopoly of the main source of food. To earn a
livelihood, all the gods, even the greatest, were now forced to labour
for him. Ogma, their champion, was sent out to collect firewood, while
the Dagda was put to work building forts and castles.

One day, when the Dagda was at his task, his son, Angus, came to him.
ou have nearly finished that castle, he said. What reward do you
intend to ask from Bress when it is done? The Dagda replied that he had
not yet thought of it. et me give you some advice, said Angus. Ask
Bress to have all the cattle in Ireland gathered together upon a plain,
so that you can pick out one for yourself. e will consent to that. Then
choose the black-maned heifer called Ocean.

The Dagda finished building the fort, and then went to Bress for his
reward. What will you have? asked Bress. I want all the cattle in
Ireland gathered together upon a plain, so that I may choose one of them
for myself. Bress did this; and the Dagda took the black-maned heifer
Angus had told him of. The king, who had epected to be asked very much
more, laughed at what he thought was the Dagdas simplicity. But Angus
had been wise; as will be seen hereafter.

Meanwhile Bress was infuriating the people of the goddess Danu by adding
avarice to tyranny. It was for kings to be liberal to all-comers, but at
the court of Bress no one ever greased his knife with fat, or made his
breath smell of ale. Nor were there ever any poets or musicians or
ugglers or esters there to give pleasure to the people; for Bress
would distribute no largess. Net, he cut down the very subsistence of
the gods. So scanty was his allowance of food that they began to grow
weak with famine. Ogma, through feebleness, could only carry one-third
of the wood needed for fuel; so that they suffered from cold as well as
from hunger.

It was at this crisis that two physicians, Miach, the son, and Airmid,
the daughter, of Diancecht, the god of medicine, came to the castle
where the dispossessed ing Nuada lived. Nuadas porter, blemished, like
himself for he had lost an eye, was sitting at the gate, and on his
lap was a cat curled up asleep. The porter asked the strangers who they
were. We are good doctors, they said. If that is so, he replied,
perhaps you can give me a new eye. ertainly, they said, we could
take one of the eyes of that cat, and put it in the place where your
lost eye used to be. I should be very pleased if you would do that,
answered the porter, So Miach and Airmid removed one of the cats eyes,
and put it in the hollow where the mans eye had been.

The story goes on to say that this was not wholly a benefit to him; for
the eye retained its cats nature, and, when the man wished to sleep at
nights, the cats eye was always looking out for mice, while it could
hardly be kept awake during the day. Nevertheless, he was pleased at the
time, and went and told Nuada, who commanded that the doctors who had
performed this marvellous cure should be brought to him.

As they came in, they heard the king groaning, for Nuadas wrist had
festered where the silver hand oined the arm of flesh. Miach asked
where Nuadas own hand was, and they told him that it had been buried
long ago. But he dug it up, and placed it to Nuadas stump; he uttered
an incantation over it, saying: Sinew to sinew, and nerve to nerve be
oined! and in three days and nights the hand had renewed itself and
fied itself to the arm, so that Nuada was whole again.

When Diancecht, Miachs father, heard of this, he was very angry to
think that his son should have ecelled him in the art of medicine. e
sent for him, and struck him upon the head with a sword, cutting the
skin, but not wounding the flesh. Miach easily healed this. So Diancecht
hit him again, this time to the bone. Again Miach cured himself. The
third time his father smote him, the sword went right through the skull
to the membrane of the brain, but even this wound Miach was able to
leech. At the fourth stroke, however, Diancecht cut the brain in two,
and Miach could do nothing for that. e died, and Diancecht buried him.
And upon his grave there grew up three hundred and sity-five stalks of
grass, each one a cure for any illness of each of the three hundred and
sity-five nerves in a mans body. Airmid, Miachs sister, plucked all
these very carefully, and arranged them on her mantle according to their
properties. But her angry and ealous father overturned the cloak, and
hopelessly confused them. If it had not been for that act, says the
early writer, men would know how to cure every illness, and would so be
immortal.

The healing of Nuadas blemish happened ust at the time when all the
people of the goddess Danu had at last agreed that the eactions and
tyranny of Bress could no longer be borne. It was the insult he put upon
airpr, son of Ogma the god of literature, that caused things to come
to this head. oets were always held by the elts in great honour; and
when airpr, the bard of the Tuatha D Danann, went to visit Bress, he
epected to be treated with much consideration, and fed at the kings
own table. But, instead of doing so, Bress lodged him in a small, dark
room where there was no fire, no bed, and no furniture ecept a mean
table on which small cakes of dry bread were put on a little dish for
his food. The net morning, airpr rose early and left the palace
without having spoken to Bress. It was the custom of poets when they
left a kings court to utter a panegyric on their host, but airpr
treated Bress instead to a magical satire. It was the first satire ever
made in Ireland, and seems to us to bear upon it all the marks of an
early effort. oughly rendered, it said:

            No meat on the plates,
               No milk of the cows;
             No shelter for the belated;
               No money for the minstrels:
             May Bresss cheer be what he gives to others!

This satire of airprs was, we are assured, so virulent that it caused
great red blotches to break out all over Bresss face. This in itself
constituted a blemish such as should not be upon a king, and the Tuatha
D Danann called upon Bress to abdicate and let Nuada take the throne
again.

Bress was obliged to do so. e went back to the country of the Fomors,
underneath the sea, and complained to his father lathan, its king,
asking him to gather an army to reconquer his throne. The Fomors
assembled in councillathan, Tethra, Balor, Indech, and all the other
warriors and chiefsand they decided to come with a great host, and take
Ireland away, and put it under the sea where the people of the goddess
Danu would never be able to find it again.

At the same time, another assembly was also being held at Tara, the
capital of the Tuatha D Danann. Nuada was celebrating his return to the
throne by a feast to his people. While it was at its height, a stranger
clothed like a king came to the palace gate. The porter asked him his
name and errand.

I am called ugh, he said. I am the grandson of Diancecht by ian, my
father, and the grandson of Balor by thniu, my mother.

But what is your profession? asked the porter; for no one is admitted
here unless he is a master of some craft.

I am a carpenter, said ugh.

We have no need of a carpenter. We already have a very good one; his
name is uchtain.

I am an ecellent smith, said ugh.

We do not want a smith. We have a very good one; his name is oibniu.

I am a professional warrior, said ugh.

We have no need of one. Ogma is our champion.

I am a harpist, said ugh.

We have an ecellent harpist already.

I am a warrior renowned for skilfulness rather than for mere strength.

We already have a man like that.

I am a poet and tale-teller, said ugh.

We have no need of such. We have a most accomplished poet and
tale-teller.

I am a sorcerer, said ugh.

We do not want one. We have numberless sorcerers and druids.

I am a physician, said ugh.

Diancecht is our physician.

I am a cup-bearer, said ugh.

We already have nine of them.

I am a worker in bronze.

We have no need of you. We already have a worker in bronze. is name is
redn.

Then ask the king, said ugh, if he has with him a man who is master
of all these crafts at once, for, if he has, there is no need for me to
come to Tara.

So the door-keeper went inside, and told the king that a man had come
who called himself ugh the Ioldanach, or the Master of all
Arts, and that he claimed to know everything.

The king sent out his best chess-player to play against the stranger.
ugh won, inventing a new move called ughs enclosure.

Then Nuada invited him in. ugh entered, and sat down upon the chair
called the sages seat, kept for the wisest man.

Ogma, the champion, was showing off his strength. pon the floor was a
flagstone so large that fourscore yokes of oen would have been needed
to move it. Ogma pushed it before him along the hall, and out at the
door. Then ugh rose from his chair, and pushed it back again. But this
stone, huge as it was, was only a portion broken from a still greater
rock outside the palace. ugh picked it up, and put it back into its
place.

The Tuatha D Danann asked him to play the harp to them. So he played
the sleep-tune, and the king and all his court fell asleep, and did
not wake until the same hour of the following day. Net he played a
plaintive air, and they all wept. astly, he played a measure which sent
them into transports of oy.

When Nuada had seen all these numerous talents of ugh, he began to
wonder whether one so gifted would not be of great help against the
Fomors. e took counsel with the others, and, by their advice, lent his
throne to ugh for thirteen days, taking the sages seat at his side.

ugh summoned all the Tuatha D Danann to a council.

The Fomors are certainly going to make war on us, he said. What can
each of you do to help?

Diancecht the hysician said: I will completely cure everyone who is
wounded, provided his head is not cut off, or his brain or spinal marrow
hurt.

I, said oibniu the Smith, will replace every broken lance and sword
with a new one, even though the war last seven years. And I will make
the lances so well that they shall never miss their mark, or fail to
kill. Dulb, the smith of the Fomors, cannot do as much as that. The fate
of the fighting will be decided by my lances.

And I, said redn the Bronze-worker, will furnish all the rivets for
the lances, the hilts for the swords, and the rims and bosses for the
shields.

And I, said uchtain the arpenter, will provide all the shields and
lance-shafts.

Ogma the hampion promised to kill the ing of the Fomors, with thrice
nine of his followers, and to capture one-third of his army.

And you, O Dagda, said ugh, what will you do?

I will fight, said the Dagda, both with force and craft. Wherever the
two armies meet, I will crush the bones of the Fomors with my club, till
they are like hailstones under a horses feet.

And you, O Morrg? said ugh.

I will pursue them when they flee, she replied. And I always catch
what I chase.

And you, O airpr, son of tan? said ugh to the poet, what can you
do?

I will pronounce an immediately-effective curse upon them; by one of my
satires I will take away all their honour, and, enchanted by me, they
shall not be able to stand against our warriors.

And ye, O sorcerers, what will ye do?

We will hurl by our magic arts, replied Mathgan, the head sorcerer,
the twelve mountains of Ireland at the Fomors. These mountains will be
Slieve eague, Denna lad, the Mourne Mountains, Bri uri, Slieve Bloom,
Slieve Snechta, Slemish, Blai-Sliab, Nephin, Sliab Maccu Belgodon,
Segais, and ruachan Aigle.

Then ugh asked the cup-bearers what they would do.

We will hide away by magic, they said, the twelve chief lakes and the
twelve chief rivers of Ireland from the Fomors, so that they shall not
be able to find any water, however thirsty they may be; those waters
will conceal themselves from the Fomors so that they shall not get a
drop, while they will give drink to the people of the goddess Danu as
long as the war lasts, even if it last seven years. And they told ugh
that the twelve chief lakes were ough Derg, ough uimnigh, ough
orrib, ough ee, ough Mask, Strangford ough, ough ig, ough
Neagh, ough Foyle, ough ara, ough eagh, and Mrloch, and that the
twelve chief rivers were the Bush, the Boyne, the Bann, the Nem, the
ee, the Shannon, the Moy, the Sligo, the rne, the Finn, the iffey,
and the Suir.

Finally, the Druid, Figol, son of Mamos, said: I will send three
streams of fire into the faces of the Fomors, and I will take away
two-thirds of their valour and strength, but every breath drawn by the
people of the goddess Danu will only make them more valorous and strong,
so that even if the fighting lasts seven years, they will not be weary
of it.

All decided to make ready for a war, and to give the direction of it to
ugh.

-----

Footnote :

  The principal sources of information for this chapter are the arleian
  MS.  entitled The Second Battle of Moytura, of which
  translations have been made by Dr. Whitley Stokes in the evue
  eltique and M. de ubainville in his pope eltique en Irlande,
  and ugene Ourrys translation in ol. I. of Atlantis of the
  Fate of the hildren of Tuirenn.

Footnote :

  ronounced ian.

Footnote :

  ronounced Ildna.

Footnote :

  The urlieu ills, between oscommon and Sligo.

Footnote :

  roagh atrick.

Footnote :

  The estuary of the Shannon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT III

                          T AI AONATS


The preparations for this war are said to have lasted seven years. It
was during the interval that there befel an episode which might almost
be called the Argonautica of the aelic mythology.

In spite of the dethronement of Bress, the Fomors still claimed their
annual tribute from the tribe of the goddess Danu, and sent their
ta-gatherers, nine times nine in number, to Balors ill to collect
it. But, while they waited for the gods to come to tender their
submission and their subsidy, they saw a young man approaching them. e
was riding upon Splendid Mane, the horse of Manannn son of r, and
was dressed in Manannns breastplate and helmet, through which no
weapon could wound their wearer, and he was armed with sword and shield
and poisoned darts. ike to the setting sun, says the story, was the
splendour of his countenance and his forehead, and they were not able to
look in his face for the greatness of his splendour. And no wonder! for
he was ugh the Far-shooter, the new-come sun-god of the aels. e fell
upon the Fomorian ta-gatherers, killing all but nine of them, and these
he only spared that they might go back to their kinsmen and tell how the
gods had received them.

There was consternation in the under-sea country. Who can this terrible
warrior be? asked Balor. I know, said Balors wife; he must be the
son of our daughter thniu; and I foretell that, since he has cast in
his lot with his fathers people, we shall never bear rule in rin
again.

The chiefs of the Fomors saw that this slaughter of their ta-gatherers
signified that the Tuatha D Danann meant fighting. They held a council
to debate on it. There came to it lathan and Tethra and Indech, kings
of the Fomors; Bress himself, and Balor of the stout blows; ethlenn the
crooked tooth, Balors wife; Balors twelve white-mouthed sons; and all
the chief Fomorian warriors and druids.

Meanwhile, upon earth, ugh was sending messengers all over rin to
assemble the Tuatha D Danann. pon this errand went ughs father ian,
who seems to have been a kind of lesser solar deity, son of
Diancecht, the god of medicine. As ian was going over the plain of
Muirthemne, he saw three armed warriors approaching him, and, when
they got nearer, he recognized them as the three sons of Tuirenn, son of
Ogma, whose names were Brian, Iuchar, and Iucharba. Between these three
and ian, with his brothers eth and u, there was, for some reason, a
private enmity. ian saw that he was now at a disadvantage. If my
brothers were with me, he said to himself, what a fight we would make;
but, as I am alone, it will be best for me to conceal myself. ooking
round, he saw a herd of pigs feeding on the plain. ike all the gods, he
had the faculty of shape-shifting; so, striking himself with a magic
wand, he changed himself into a pig, oined the herd, and began feeding
with them.

But he had been seen by the sons of Tuirenn. What has become of the
warrior who was walking on the plain a moment ago? said Brian to his
brothers. We saw him then, they replied, but we do not know where he
is now. Then you have not used the proper vigilance which is needed in
time of war, said the elder brother. owever, I know what has become
of him. e has struck himself with a druidical wand, and changed himself
into a pig, and there he is, in that herd, rooting up the ground, ust
like all the other pigs. I can also tell you who he is. is name is
ian, and you know that he is no friend of ours.

It is a pity that he has taken refuge among the pigs, they replied,
for they belong to some one of the Tuatha D Danann, and, even if we
were to kill them all, ian might still escape us.

Again Brian reproached his brothers. ou are very ignorant, he said,
if you cannot distinguish a magical beast from a natural beast.
owever, I will show you. And thereupon he struck his two brothers with
his own wand of shape-changing, and turned them into two swift, slender
hounds, and set them upon the pigs.

The magic hounds soon found the magic pig, and drove it out of the herd
on to the open plain. Then Brian threw his spear, and hit it. The
wounded pig came to a stop. It was an evil deed of yours, casting that
spear, it cried, in a human voice, for I am not a pig, but ian, son
of Diancecht. So give me quarter.

Iuchar and Iucharba would have granted it, and let him go; but their
fiercer brother swore that ian should be put an end to, even if he came
back to life seven times. So ian tried a fresh ruse. ive me leave,
he asked, only to return to my own shape before you slay me. ladly,
replied Brian, for I would much rather kill a man than a pig.

So ian spoke the befitting spell, cast off his pigs disguise, and
stood before them in his own shape. ou will be obliged to spare my
life now, he said. We will not, replied Brian. Then it will be the
worst days work for all of you that you ever did in your lives, he
answered; for, if you had killed me in the shape of a pig, you would
only have had to pay the value of a pig, but if you kill me now, I tell
you that there never has been, and there never will be, anyone killed in
this world for whose death a greater blood-fine will be eacted than for
mine.

But the sons of Tuirenn would not listen to him. They slew him, and
pounded his body with stones until it was a crushed mass. Si times they
tried to bury him, and the earth cast him back in horror; but, the
seventh time, the mould held him, and they put stones upon him to keep
him down. They left him buried there, and went to Tara.

Meanwhile ugh had been epecting his fathers return. As he did not
come, he determined to go and look for him. e traced him to the lain
of Muirthemne, and there he was at fault. But the indignant earth
itself, which had witnessed the murder, spoke to ugh, and told him
everything. So ugh dug up his fathers corpse, and made certain how he
had come to his death; then he mourned over him, and laid him back in
the earth, and heaped a barrow over him, and set up a pillar with his
name on it in ogam.

e went back to Tara, and entered the great hall. It was filled with the
people of the goddess Danu, and among them ugh saw the three sons of
Tuirenn. So he shook the chiefs chain, with which the aels used to
ask for a hearing in an assembly, and when all were silent, he said:

eople of the goddess Danu, I ask you a question. What would be the
vengeance that any of you would take upon one who had murdered his
father?

A great astonishment fell upon them, and Nuada, their king, said:
Surely it is not your father that has been murdered?

It is, replied ugh. And I am looking at those who murdered him; and
they know how they did it better than I do.

Then Nuada declared that nothing short of hewing the murderer of his
father limb from limb would satisfy him, and all the others said the
same, including the sons of Tuirenn.

The very ones who did the deed say that, cried ugh. Then let them
not leave the hall till they have settled with me about the blood-fine
to be paid for it.

If it was I who had killed your father, said the king, I should think
myself lucky if you were willing to accept a fine instead of vengeance.

The sons of Tuirenn took counsel together in whispers. Iuchar and
Iucharba were in favour of admitting their guilt, but Brian was afraid
that, if they confessed, ugh would withdraw his offer to accept a fine,
and would demand their deaths. So he stood out, and said that, though it
was not they who had killed ian, yet, sooner than remain under ughs
anger, as he suspected them, they would pay the same fine as if they
had.

ertainly you shall pay the fine, said ugh, and I will tell you what
it shall be. It is this: three apples; and a pigs-skin; and a spear;
and two horses and a chariot; and seven pigs; and a hound-whelp; and a
cooking-spit; and three shouts on a hill: that is the fine, and, if you
think it is too much, I will remit some of it, but, if you do not think
it is too much, then pay it.

If it were a hundred times that, replied Brian, we should not think
it too much. Indeed, it seems so little that I fear there must be some
treachery concealed in it.

I do not think it too little, replied ugh. ive me your pledge
before the people of the goddess Danu that you will pay it faithfully,
and I will give you mine that I will ask no more.

So the sons of Tuirenn bound themselves before the Tuatha D Danann to
pay the fine to ugh.

When they had sworn, and given sureties, ugh turned to them again. I
will now, he said, eplain to you the nature of the fine you have
pledged yourselves to pay me, so that you may know whether it is too
little or not. And, with foreboding hearts, the sons of Tuirenn set
themselves to listen.

The three apples that I have demanded, he began, are three apples
from the arden of the esperides, in the east of the world. ou will
know them by three signs. They are the size of the head of a month-old
child, they are of the colour of burnished gold, and they taste of
honey. Wounds are healed and diseases cured by eating them, and they do
not diminish in any way by being eaten. Whoever casts one of them hits
anything he wishes, and then it comes back into his hand. I will accept
no other apples instead of these. Their owners keep them perpetually
guarded because of a prophecy that three young warriors from the west of
the world will come to take them by force, and, brave as you may be, I
do not think that you will ever get them.

The pigs-skin that I have demanded is the pigs-skin of Tuis, ing of
reece. It has two virtues: its touch perfectly cures all wounded or
sick persons if only there is any life still left in them; and every
stream of water through which it passes is turned into wine for nine
days. I do not think that you will get it from the ing of reece,
either with his consent or without it.

And can you guess what spear it is that I have demanded? asked ugh.
We cannot, they said. It is the poisoned spear of isear, ing
of ersia; it is irresistible in battle; it is so fiery that its blade
must always be held under water, lest it destroy the city in which it is
kept. ou will find it very difficult to obtain.

And the two horses and the chariot are the two wonderful horses of
Dobhar, ing of Sicily, which run equally well over land and sea;
there are no other horses in the world like them, and no other vehicle
equal to the chariot.

And the seven pigs are the pigs of asal, ing of the olden
illars; though they may be killed every night, they are found alive
again the net day, and every person that eats part of them can never be
afflicted with any disease.

And the hound-whelp I claim is the hound-whelp of the ing of
Ioruaidhe; her name is Failinis; every wild beast she sees she
catches at once. It will not be easy for you to secure her.

The cooking-spit which you must get for me is one of the cooking-spits
of the women of the Island of Fianchuiv, which is at the bottom of
the sea, between rin and Alba.

ou have also pledged yourselves to give three shouts upon a hill. The
hill upon which they must be given is the hill called noc
Miodhchaoin, in the north of ochlann. Miodhchaoin and his
sons do not allow shouts to be given on that hill; besides this, it was
they who gave my father his military education, and, even if I were to
forgive you, they would not; so that, though you achieve all the other
adventures, I think that you will fail in this one.

Now you know what sort of a fine it is that you have bargained to pay
me, said ugh.

And fear and astonishment fell upon the sons of Tuirenn.

This tale is evidently the work of some ancient Irish story-teller who
wished to compile from various sources a more or less complete account
of how the aelic gods obtained their legendary possessions. The spear
of isear, ing of ersia, is obviously the same weapon as the lance of
ugh, which another tradition describes as having been brought by the
Tuatha D Danann from their original home in the city of orias;
Failinis, the whelp of the ing of Ioruaidhe, is ughs hound of
mightiest deeds, which was irresistible in battle, and which turned any
running water it bathed in into wine, a property here transferred
to the magic pigs-skin of ing Tuis: the seven swine of the ing of the
olden illars must be the same undying porkers from whose flesh
Manannn mac ir made the Feast of Age which preserved the eternal
youth of the gods; it was with horses and chariot that ran along
the surface of the sea that Manannn used to ourney to and fro between
rin and the eltic lysium in the West; the apples that grew in
the arden of the esperides were surely of the same celestial growth as
those that fed the inhabitants of that immortal country; while the
cooking-spit reminds us of three such implements at Tara, made by
oibniu and associated with the names of the Dagda and the Morrg.

The burden of collecting all these treasures was placed upon the
shoulders of the three sons of Tuirenn.

They consulted together, and agreed that they could never hope to
succeed unless they had Manannns magic horse, Splendid Mane, and
Manannns magic coracle, Wave-sweeper. But both these had been lent
by Manannn to ugh himself. So the sons of Tuirenn were obliged to
humble themselves to beg them from ugh. The sun-god would not lend them
the horse, for fear of making their task too easy, but he let them have
the boat, because he knew how much the spear of isear and the horses of
Dobhar would be needed in the coming war with the Fomors. They bade
farewell to their father, and went down to the shore and put out to sea,
taking their sister with them.

Which portion of the fine shall we seek first? said the others to
Brian. We will seek them in the order in which they were demanded, he
replied. So they directed the magic boat to sail to the arden of the
esperides, and presently they arrived there.

They landed at a harbour, and held a council of war. It was decided that
their best chance of obtaining three of the apples would be by taking
the shapes of hawks. Thus they would have strength enough in their claws
to carry the apples away, together with sufficient quickness upon the
wing to hope to escape the arrows, darts, and sling-stones which would
be shot and hurled at them by the warders of the garden.

They swooped down upon the orchard from above. It was done so swiftly
that they carried off the three apples, unhit either by shaft or stone.
But their difficulties were not yet over. The king of the country had
three daughters who were well skilled in witchcraft. By sorcery they
changed themselves into three ospreys, and pursued the three hawks. But
the sons of Tuirenn reached the shore first, and, changing themselves
into swans, dived into the sea. They came up close to their coracle, and
got into it, and sailed swiftly away with the spoil.

Thus their first quest was finished, and they voyaged on to reece, to
seek the pigs-skin of ing Tuis. No one could go without some ecuse
into a kings court, so they decided to disguise themselves as poets,
and to tell the door-keeper that they were professional bards from rin,
seeking largess at the hands of kings. The porter let them into the
great hall, where the poets of reece were singing before the king.

When those had all finished, Brian rose, and asked permission to show
his art. This was accorded; and he sang:

             O Tuis, we conceal not thy fame.
              We praise thee as the oak above the kings;
              The skin of a pig, bounty without hardness!
              This is the reward which I ask for it.

             A stormy host and raging sea
              Are a dangerous power, should one oppose it.
              The skin of a pig, bounty without hardness!
              This is the reward I ask, O Tuis.

That is a good poem, said the king, only I do not understand it.

I will eplain it, said Brian. We praise thee as the oak above the
kings; this means that, as the oak ecels all other trees, so do you
ecel all other kings in nobility and generosity. The skin of a pig,
bounty without hardness; that is a pigs-skin which you have, O Tuis,
and which I should like to receive as the reward of my poem. A stormy
host and raging sea are a dangerous power, should one oppose it; this
means to say, that we are not used to going without anything on which we
have set our hearts, O Tuis.

I should have liked your poem better, replied the king, if my
pigs-skin had not been mentioned in it. It was not a wise thing for you
to have done, O poet. But I will measure three fills of red gold out of
the skin, and you shall have those.

May all good be thine, O ing! answered Brian. I knew that I should
get a noble reward.

So the king sent for the pigs-skin to measure out the gold with. But,
as soon as Brian saw it, he seized it with his left hand, and slew the
man who was holding it, and Iuchar and Iucharba also hacked about them;
and they cut their way down to the boat, leaving the ing of reece
among the dead behind them.

And now we will go and get ing isears spear, said Brian. So,
leaving reece, they sailed in their coracle to ersia.

Their plan of disguising themselves as poets had served them so well
that they decided to make use of it again. So they went into the ing of
ersias hall in the same way as they had entered that of the ing of
reece. Brian first listened to the poets of ersia singing; then he
sang his own song:

              Small the esteem of any spear with isear;
               The battles of foes are broken;
               No oppression to isear;
               veryone whom he wounds.

              A yew-tree, the finest of the wood,
               It is called ing without opposition.
               May that splendid shaft drive on
               on crowd into their wounds of death.

That is a good poem, O man of rin, said the king, but why is my
spear mentioned in it?

The meaning is this, replied Brian: I should like to receive that
spear as a reward for my poem.

ou make a rash request, said the king. If I spare your life after
having heard it, it will be a sufficient reward for your poem.

Brian had one of the magic apples in his hand, and he remembered its
boomerang-like quality. e hurled it full in the ing of ersias face,
dashing out his brains. The ersians flew to arms, but the three sons of
Tuirenn conquered them, and made them yield up the spear.

They had now to travel to Sicily, to obtain the horses and chariot of
ing Dobhar. But they were afraid to go as poets this time, for fear the
fame of their deeds might have got abroad. They therefore decided to
pretend to be mercenary soldiers from rin, and offer the ing of Sicily
their service. This, they thought, would be the easiest way of finding
out where the horses and the chariot were kept. So they went and stood
on the green before the royal court.

When the ing of Sicily heard that there had come mercenaries from rin,
seeking wages from the kings of the world, he invited them to take
service with him. They agreed; but, though they stayed with him a
fortnight and a month, they never saw the horses, or even found out
where they were kept. So they went to the king, and announced that they
wished to leave him.

Why? he asked, for he did not want them to go.

We will tell you, O ing! replied Brian. It is because we have not
been honoured with your confidence, as we have been accustomed with
other kings. ou have two horses and a chariot, the best in the world,
and we have not even been allowed to see them.

I would have shown them to you on the first day if you had asked me,
said the king; and you shall see them at once, for I have seldom had
warriors with me so good as you are, and I do not wish you to leave me.

So he sent for the steeds, and had them yoked to the chariot, and the
sons of Tuirenn were witnesses of their marvellous speed, and how they
could run equally well over land or water.

Brian made a sign to his brothers, and they watched their opportunity
carefully, and, as the chariot passed close beside them, Brian leaped
into it, hurling its driver over the side. Then, turning the horses, he
struck ing Dobhar with isears spear, and killed him. e took his two
brothers up into the chariot and they drove away.

By the time the sons of Tuirenn reached the country of asal, ing of
the illars of old, rumour had gone before them. The king came down to
the harbour to meet them, and asked them if it were really true that so
many kings had fallen at their hands. They replied that it was true, but
that they had no quarrel with any of them; only they must obtain at all
costs the fine demanded by ugh. Then asal asked them why they had come
to his land, and they told him that they needed his seven pigs to add to
the tribute. So asal thought it better to give them up, and to make
friends with the three sons of Tuirenn, than to fight with such
warriors. The sons of Tuirenn were very glad at this, for they were
growing weary of battles.

It happened that the ing of Ioruaidhe, who had the hound-whelp that
ugh had demanded, was the husband of ing asals daughter. Therefore
ing asal did not wish that there should be fighting between him and
the three sons of Tuirenn. e proposed to Brian and his brothers that he
should sail with them to Ioruaidhe, and try to persuade the king of the
country to give up the hound-whelp peacefully. They consented, and all
set foot safely on the delightful, wonderful shores of Ioruaidhe,
as the manuscript calls them. But ing asals son-in-law would not
listen to reason. e assembled his warriors, and fought; but the sons of
Tuirenn defeated them, and compelled their king to yield up the
hound-whelp as the ransom for his life.

All these quests had been upon the earth, but the net was harder. No
coracle, not even Manannns Wave-sweeper, could penetrate to the
Island of Fianchuiv, in the depths of the sea that severs rin from
Alba. So Brian left his brothers, and put on his water-dress, with his
transparency of glass upon his headevidently an ancient Irish
anticipation of the modern divers dress. Thus equipped, he eplored the
bottom of the sea for fourteen days before he found the island. But when
at last he reached it, and entered the hall of its queen, she and her
sea-maidens were so amazed at Brians hardihood in having penetrated to
their kingdom that they presented him with the cooking-spit, and sent
him back safe.

By this time, ugh had found out by his magic arts that the sons of
Tuirenn had obtained all the treasures he had demanded as the
blood-fine. e desired to get them safely into his own custody before
his victims went to give their three shouts upon Miodhchaoins ill. e
therefore wove a druidical spell round them, so that they forgot the
rest of their task altogether, and sailed back to rin. They searched
for ugh, to give him the things, but he had gone away, leaving word
that they were to be handed over to Nuada, the Tuatha D Danann king. As
soon as they were in safe-keeping, ugh came back to Tara and found the
sons of Tuirenn there. And he said to them:

Do you not know that it is unlawful to keep back any part of a
blood-fine? So have you given those three shouts upon Miodhchaoins
ill?

Then the magic mist of forgetfulness fell from them, and they
remembered. Sorrowfully they went back to complete their task.

Miodhchaoin himself was watching for them, and, when he saw them
land, he came down to the beach. Brian attacked him, and they fought
with the swiftness of two bears and the ferocity of two lions until
Miodhchaoin fell.

Then Miodhchaoins three sonsorc, onn, and Aedhcame out to avenge
their father, and they drove their spears through the bodies of the
three sons of Tuirenn. But the three sons of Tuirenn also drove their
spears through the bodies of the three sons of Miodhchaoin.

The three sons of Miodhchaoin were killed, and the three sons of Tuirenn
were so sorely wounded that birds might have flown through their bodies
from one side to the other. Nevertheless Brian was still able to stand
upright, and he held his two brothers, one in each hand, and kept them
on their feet, and, all together, they gave three faint, feeble shouts.

Their coracle bore them, still living, to rin. They sent their father
Tuirenn as a suppliant to ugh, begging him to lend them the magic
pigs-skin to heal their wounds.

But ugh would not, for he had counted upon their fight with the sons of
Miodhchaoin to avenge his father ians death. So the children of
Tuirenn resigned themselves to die, and their father made a farewell
song over them and over himself, and died with them.

Thus ends that famous taleThe Fate of the Sons of Tuirenn, known as
one of the Three Sorrowful Stories of rin.

-----

Footnote :

  This story of the Fate of the hildren of Tuirenn is mentioned in
  the ninth-century ormacs lossary. It is found in various Irish
  and Scottish MSS., including the Book of ecan. The present re-telling
  is from ugene Ourrys translation, published in Atlantis, ol.
  I.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, pp. -.

Footnote :

  A part of ounty outh, between the Boyne and Dundalk. The heroic
  cycle connects it especially with uchulainn. ronounced Mrthemna
  or Mrhevna.

Footnote :

  There is known to have been a hill called Ard hein ians Mound in
  the district of Muirthemne, and Ourry identifies it tentatively with
  one now called Dromslian.

Footnote :

  ronounced zar.

Footnote :

  ronounced Dobar.

Footnote :

  ronounced Asal.

Footnote :

  ronounced Irda.

Footnote :

  ronounced Fincra.

Footnote :

  The ill cnoc of Midkna.

Footnote :

  A mythical country inhabited by Fomors.

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe ods Arrive.

Footnote :

  Ibid.

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe ods Arrive.

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe ods in ile.

Footnote :

  Ibid.

Footnote :

  etrie: ist. and Antiq. of Tara ill.

Footnote :

  The country seems to have been identified with Norway or Iceland.

Footnote :

  ronounced Midkna.

Footnote :

  The other two are The Fate of the hildren of r, told in chap. I,
  and The Fate of the Sons of snach, an episode of the eroic ycle,
  related in chap. III.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               AT I

                      T WA WIT T IANTS


By this time the seven years of preparation had come to an end. A week
before the Day of Samhain, the Morrg discovered that the Fomors had
landed upon rin. She at once sent a messenger to tell the Dagda, who
ordered his druids and sorcerers to go to the ford of the iver nius,
in Sligo, and utter incantations against them.

The people of the goddess Danu, however, were not yet quite ready for
battle. So the Dagda decided to visit the Fomorian camp as an
ambassador, and, by parleying with them, to gain a little more time. The
Fomors received him with apparent courtesy, and, to celebrate his
coming, prepared him a feast of porridge; for it was well-known how fond
he was of such food. They poured into their kings cauldron, which was
as deep as five giants fists, fourscore gallons of new milk, with meal
and bacon in proportion. To this they added the whole carcasses of
goats, sheep, and pigs; they boiled the miture together, and poured it
into a hole in the ground. Now, said they, if you do not eat it all,
we shall put you to death, for we will not have you go back to your own
people and say that the Fomors are inhospitable. But they did not
succeed in frightening the Dagda. e took his spoon, which was so large
that two persons of our puny size might have reclined comfortably in the
middle of it, dipped it into the porridge, and fished up halves of
salted pork and quarters of bacon.

If it tastes as good as it smells, he said, it is good fare. And so
it proved; for he ate it all, and scraped up even what remained at the
bottom of the hole. Then he went away to sleep it off, followed by the
laughter of the Fomors; for his stomach was so swollen with food that he
could hardly walk. It was larger than the biggest cauldron in a large
house, and stood out like a sail before the wind.

But the Fomors little practical oke upon the Dagda had given the
Tuatha D Danann time to collect their forces. It was on the eve of
Samhain that the two armies came face to face. ven then the Fomors
could not believe that the people of the goddess Danu would offer them
much resistance.

Do you think they will really dare to give us battle? said Bress to
Indech, the son of Domnu. If they do not pay their tribute, we will
pound their bones for them, he replied.

The war of gods and giants naturally mirrored the warfare of the aels,
in whose battles, as in those of most semi-barbarous people, single
combat figured largely. The main armies stood still, while, every day,
duels took place between ambitious combatants. But no great warriors
either of the Tuatha D Danann or of the Fomors took part in them.

Sometimes a god, sometimes a giant would be the victor; but there was a
difference in the net results that astonished the Fomors. If their own
swords and lances were broken, they were of no more use, and if their
own champions were killed, they never came back to life again; but it
was quite otherwise with the people of the goddess Danu. Weapons
shattered on one day re-appeared upon the net in as good condition as
though they had never been used, and warriors slain on one day came back
upon the morrow unhurt, and ready, if necessary, to be killed again.

The Fomors decided to send someone to discover the secret of these
prodigies. The spy they chose was uadan, the son of Bress and of
Brigit, daughter of the Dagda, and therefore half-giant and half-god. e
disguised himself as a Tuatha D Danann warrior, and went to look for
oibniu. e found him at his forge, together with uchtain, the
carpenter, and redn, the bronze-worker. e saw how oibniu forged
lance-heads with three blows of his hammer, while uchtain cut shafts
for them with three blows of his ae, and redn fied the two parts
together so adroitly that his bronze nails needed no hammering in. e
went back and told the Fomors, who sent him again, this time to try and
kill oibniu.

e reappeared at the forge, and asked for a avelin. Without suspicion,
oibniu gave him one, and, as soon as he got it into his hand, he thrust
it through the smiths body. But oibniu plucked it out, and, hurling it
back at his assailant, mortally wounded him. uadan went home to die,
and his father Bress and his mother Brigit mourned for him, inventing
for the purpose the Irish keening. oibniu, on the other hand, took no
harm. e went to the physician Diancecht, who, with his daughter Airmid,
was always on duty at a miraculous well called the spring of health.
Whenever one of the Tuatha D Danann was killed or wounded, he was
brought to the two doctors, who plunged him into the wonder-working
water, and brought him back to life and health again.

The mystic spring was not long, however, allowed to help the people of
the goddess. A young Fomorian chief, Octriallach son of Indech, found it
out. e and a number of his companions went to it by night, each
carrying a large stone from the bed of the iver Drowes. These they
dropped into the spring, until they had filled it, dispersed the healing
water, and formed a cairn above it. egend has identified this place by
the name of the airn of Octriallach.

This success determined the Fomors to fight a pitched battle. They drew
out their army in line. There was not a warrior in it who had not a coat
of mail and a helmet, a stout spear, a strong buckler, and a heavy
sword. Fighting the Fomors on that day, says the old author, could
only be compared to one of three thingsbeating ones head against a
rock, or plunging it into a fire, or putting ones hand into a serpents
nest.

All the great fighters of the Tuatha D Danann were drawn out opposite
to them, ecept ugh. A council of the gods had decided that his varied
accomplishments made his life too valuable to be risked in battle. They
had, therefore, left him behind, guarded by nine warriors. But, at the
last moment, ugh escaped from his warders, and appeared in his chariot
before the army. e made them a patriotic speech. Fight bravely, he
said, that your servitude may last no longer; it is better to face
death than to live in vassalage and pay tribute. With these encouraging
words, he drove round the ranks, standing on tiptoe, so that all the
Tuatha D Danann might see him.

The Fomors saw him too, and marvelled. It seems wonderful to me,
said Bress to his druids, that the sun should rise in the west to-day
and in the east every other day. It would be better for us if it were
so, replied the druids. What else can it be, then? asked Bress. It
is the radiance of the face of ugh of the ong Arms, said they.

Then the two armies charged each other with a great shout. Spears and
lances smote against shields, and so great was the shouting of the
fighters, the shattering of shields, the clattering of swords, the
rattling of quivers, and the whistling of darts and avelins that it
seemed as if thunder rolled everywhere.

They fought so closely that the heads, hands, and feet of those on one
side were touching the heads, hands, and feet of those on the other
side; they shed so much blood on to the ground that it became hard to
stand on it without slipping; and the river of nsenn was filled with
dead bodies, so hard and swift and bloody and cruel was the battle.

Many great chiefs fell on each side. Ogma, the champion of the Tuatha D
Danann, killed Indech, the son of the goddess Domnu. But, meanwhile,
Balor of the Mighty Blows raged among the gods, slaying their king,
Nuada of the Silver and, as well as Macha, one of his warlike wives. At
last he met with ugh. The sun-god shouted a challenge to his
grandfather in the Fomorian speech. Balor heard it, and prepared to use
his death-dealing eye.

ift up my eyelid, he said to his henchmen, that I may see this
chatterer who talks to me.

The attendants lifted Balors eye with a hook, and if the glance of the
eye beneath had rested upon ugh, he would certainly have perished. But,
when it was half opened, ugh flung a magic stone which struck Balors
eye out through the back of his head. The eye fell on the ground behind
Balor, and destroyed a whole rank of thrice nine Fomors who were unlucky
enough to be within sight of it.

An ancient poem has handed down the secret of this magic stone. It is
there called a tathlum, meaning a concrete ball such as the ancient
Irish warriors used sometimes to make out of the brains of dead enemies
hardened with lime.

             A tathlum, heavy, fiery, firm,
              Which the Tuatha D Danann had with them,
              It was that broke the fierce Balors eye,
              Of old, in the battle of the great armies.

             The blood of toads and furious bears,
              And the blood of the noble lion,
              The blood of vipers and of Osmuinns trunks;
              It was of these the tathlum was composed.

             The sand of the swift Armorian sea,
              And the sand of the teeming ed Sea;
              All these, being first purified, were used
              In the composition of the tathlum.

             Briun, the son of Bethar, no mean warrior,
              Who on the oceans eastern border reigned;
              It was he that fused, and smoothly formed,
              It was he that fashioned the tathlum.

             To the hero ugh was given
              This concrete ball,no soft missile;
              In Mag Tuireadh of shrieking wails,
              From his hand he threw the tathlum.

This blinding of the terrible Balor turned the fortunes of the fight;
for the Fomors wavered, and the Morrg came and encouraged the people
of the goddess Danu with a song, beginning ings arise to the battle,
so that they took fresh heart, and drove the Fomors headlong back to
their country underneath the sea.

Such was the battle which is called in Irish Mag Tuireadh na
b-Fomorach, that is to say, the lain of the Towers of the Fomors,
and, more popularly, the Battle of Moytura the Northern, to
distinguish it from the other Battle of Moytura fought by the Tuatha D
Danann against the Fir Bolgs farther to the south. More of the Fomors
were killed in it, says the ancient manuscript, than there are stars in
the sky, grains of sand on the sea-shore, snow-flakes in winter, drops
of dew upon the meadows in spring-time, hailstones during a storm,
blades of grass trodden under horses feet, or Manannn son of rs
white horses, the waves of the sea, when a tempest breaks. The towers
or pillars said to mark the graves of the combatants still stand upon
the plain of arrowmore, near Sligo, and form, in the opinion of Dr.
etrie, the finest collection of prehistoric monuments in the world,
with the sole eception of arnac, in Brittany. Megalithic
structures of almost every kind are found among themstone cairns with
dolmens in their interiors, dolmens standing open and alone, dolmens
surrounded by one, two, or three circles of stones, and circles without
dolmensto the number of over a hundred. Sity-four of such prehistoric
remains stand together upon an elevated plateau not more than a mile
across, and make the battle-field of Moytura, though the least known,
perhaps the most impressive of all primeval ruins. What they really
commemorated we may never know, but, in all probability, the place was
the scene of some important and decisive early battle, the monuments
marking the graves of the chieftains who were interred as the result of
it. Those which have been eamined were found to contain burnt wood and
the half-burnt bones of men and horses, as well as implements of flint
and bone. The actors, therefore, were still in the Neolithic Age.
Whether the horses were domesticated ones buried with their riders, or
wild ones eaten at the funeral feasts, it would be hard to decide. The
history of the real event must have been long lost even at the early
date when its relics were pointed out as the records of a battle between
the gods and the giants of aelic myth.

The Tuatha D Danann, following the routed Fomors, overtook and captured
Bress. e begged ugh to spare his life.

What ransom will you pay for it? asked ugh.

I will guarantee that the cows of Ireland shall always be in milk,
promised Bress.

But, before accepting, ugh took counsel with his druids.

What good will that be, they decided, if Bress does not also lengthen
the lives of the cows?

This was beyond the power of Bress to do; so he made another offer.

Tell your people, he said to ugh, that, if they will spare my life,
they shall have a good wheat harvest every year.

But they said: We already have the spring to plough and sow in, the
summer to ripen the crops, the autumn for reaping, and the winter in
which to eat the bread; and that is all we want.

ugh told this to Bress. But he also said: ou shall have your life in
return for a much less service to us than that.

What is it? asked Bress.

Tell us when we ought to plough, when we ought to sow, and when we
ought to harvest.

Bress replied: ou should plough on a Tuesday, sow on a Tuesday, and
harvest on a Tuesday.

And this lying maim says the story saved Bresss life.

ugh, the Dagda, and Ogma still pursued the Fomors, who had carried off
in their flight the Dagdas harp. They followed them into the submarine
palace where Bress and lathan lived, and there they saw the harp
hanging on the wall. This harp of the Dagdas would not play without its
owners leave. The Dagda sang to it:

              ome, oak of the two cries!
               ome, hand of fourfold music!
               ome, summer! ome, winter!
               oice of harps, bellows, and flutes!

For the Dagdas harp had these two names; it was called Oak of the two
cries and and of fourfold music.

It leaped down from the wall, killing nine of the Fomors as it passed,
and came into the Dagdas hand. The Dagda played to the Fomors the three
tunes known to all clever harpiststhe weeping-tune, the laughing-tune,
and the sleeping-tune. While he played the weeping-tune, they were bowed
with weeping; while he played the laughing-tune, they rocked with
laughter; and when he played the sleeping-tune, they all fell asleep.
And while they slept, ugh, the Dagda, and Ogma got away safely.

Net, the Dagda brought the black-maned heifer which he had, by the
advice of Angus son of the oung, obtained from Bress. The wisdom of
Angus had been shown in this advice, for it was this very heifer that
the cattle of the people of the goddess Danu were accustomed to follow,
whenever it lowed. Now, when it lowed, all the cattle which the Fomors
had taken away from the Tuatha D Danann came back again.

et the power of the Fomors was not wholly broken. Four of them still
carried on a desultory warfare by spoiling the corn, fruit, and milk of
their conquerors. But the Morrg and Badb and Mider and Angus pursued
them, and drove them out of Ireland for ever.

ast of all, the Morrg and Badb went up on to the summits of all the
high mountains of Ireland, and proclaimed the victory. All the lesser
gods who had not been in the battle came round and heard the news. And
Badb sang a song which began:

                     eace mounts to the heavens,
                      The heavens descend to earth,
                      arth lies under the heavens,
                      veryone is strong ...,

but the rest of it has been lost and forgotten.

Then she added a prophecy in which she foretold the approaching end of
the divine age, and the beginning of a new one in which summers would be
flowerless and cows milkless and women shameless and men strengthless,
in which there would be trees without fruit and seas without fish, when
old men would give false udgments and legislators make unust laws,
when warriors would betray one another, and men would be thieves, and
there would be no more virtue left in the world.

-----

Footnote :

  This chapter is, with slight interpolations, based upon the arleian
  MS. in the British Museum numbered , and called the Second Battle
  of Moytura, or rather from translations made of it by Dr. Whitley
  Stokes, published in the evue eltique, ol. II, and by M. de
  ubainville in his pope eltique en Irlande.

Footnote :

  I have interpolated this picturesque passage from the account of a
  fight between the Tuatha D Danann and the Fomors in the Fate of the
  hildren of Tuirenn. Ourrys translation in Atlantis, ol. I.

Footnote :

  This translation was made by ugene Ourry from an ancient vellum MS.
  formerly belonging to Mr. W. Monck Mason, but since sold by auction in
  ondon. See his Manners and ustoms of the Ancient Irish, ecture
  II, p. .

Footnote :

  See Fergusson: ude Stone Monuments, pp. , c.

Footnote :

  ? Bagpipes.

Footnote :

  Book of Fermoy. See evue eltique, ol. I.The Ancient Irish
  oddess of War.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               AT 

                  T ONST OF T ODS B MOTAS


Of what Badb had in mind when she uttered this prophecy we have no
record. But it was true. The twilight of the Irish gods was at hand. A
new race was coming across the sea to dispute the ownership of Ireland
with the people of the goddess Danu. And these new-comers were not
divinities like themselves, but men like ourselves, ancestors of the
aels.

This story of the conquest of the gods by mortalswhich seems such a
strange one to usis typically eltic. The aelic mythology is the only
one which has preserved it in any detail; but the doctrine would seem to
have been common at one time to all the elts. It was, however, of less
shame to the gods than would otherwise have been; for men were of as
divine descent as themselves. The dogma of the elts was that men were
descended from the god of death, and first came from the and of the
Dead to take possession of the present world. aesar tells us, in
his too short account of the auls, that they believed themselves to be
sprung from Dis ater, the god of the underworld. In the aelic
mythology Dis ater was called Bil, a name which has for root the
syllable bel, meaning to die. The god Beli in British mythology was
no doubt the same person, while the same idea is epressed by the same
root in the name of Balor, the terrible Fomor whose glance was
death.

The post-hristian Irish chroniclers, seeking to reconcile hristian
teachings with the still vital pagan mythology by changing the gods into
ancient kings and incorporating them into the annals of the country,
with appropriate dates, also disposed of the genuine early doctrine by
substituting Spain for ades, and giving a highly-fanciful account of
the origin and wanderings of their ancestors. To use a ibernicism,
appropriate in this connection, the first Irishman was a Scythian called
Fenius Farsa. Deprived of his own throne, he had settled in gypt, where
his son Niul married a daughter of the reigning haraoh. er name was
Scta, and she had a son called oidel, whose great-grandson was named
ber Scot, the whole genealogy being probably invented to eplain the
origin of the three names by which the aels called themselvesFinn,
Scot, and oidel. Fenius and his family and clan were turned out of
gypt for refusing to oin in the persecution of the children of Israel,
and soourned in Africa for forty-two years. Their wanderings took them
to the altars of the hilistines, by the ake of Osiers; then, passing
between usicada and the hilly country of Syria, they travelled through
Mauretania as far as the illars of ercules; and thence landed in
Spain, where they lived many years, greatly increasing and multiplying.
The same route is given by the twelfth-century British historian,
eoffrey of Monmouth, as that taken by Brutus and the Troans when they
came to colonize Britain. Its only connection with any kind of fact
is that it corresponds fairly well with what ethnologists consider must
have been the westward line of migration taken, not, curiously enough,
by the Aryan elts, but by the pre-Aryan Iberians.

It is sufficient for us to find the first men in Spain, remembering that
Spain stood for the eltic ades, or lysium. In this country Bregon,
the father of two sons, Bil and Ith, had built a watch-tower, from
which, one winters evening, Ith saw, far off over the seas, a land he
had never noticed before. It is on winter evenings, when the air is
pure, that mans eyesight reaches farthest, remarks the old tract
called the Book of Invasions, gravely accounting for the fact
that Ith saw Ireland from Spain.

Wishing to eamine it nearer, he set sail with thrice thirty warriors,
and landed without mishap at the mouth of the iver Scn. The
country seemed to him to be uninhabited, and he marched with his men
towards the north. At last he reached Aileach, near the present town of
ondonderry.

ere he found the three reigning kings of the people of the goddess
Danu, Mac uill, Mac echt, and Mac rein, the sons of Ogma, and
grandsons of the Dagda. These had succeeded Nuada the Silver-handed,
killed in the battle with the Fomors; and had met, after burying their
predecessor in a tumulus called rianan Aileach, which still stands on
the base of the Inishowen eninsula, between ough Swilly and ough
Foyle, to divide his kingdom among them. nable to arrive at any
partition satisfactory to all, they appealed to the new-comer to
arbitrate.

The advice of Ith was moral rather than practical. Act according to the
laws of ustice was all that he would say to the claimants; and then he
was indiscreet enough to burst into enthusiastic praises of Ireland for
its temperate climate and its richness in fruit, honey, wheat, and fish.
Such sentiments from a foreigner seemed to the Tuatha D Danann
suggestive of a desire to take the country from them. They conspired
together and treacherously killed Ith at a place since called Iths
lain. They, however, spared his followers, who returned to Spain,
taking their dead leaders body with them. The indignation there was
great, and Mil, Bils son and Iths nephew, determined to go to
Ireland and get revenge.

Mil therefore sailed with his eight sons and their wives. Thirty-si
chiefs, each with his shipful of warriors, accompanied him. By the magic
arts of their druid, Amergin of the Fair nee, they discovered the eact
place at which Ith had landed before them, and put in to shore there.
Two alone failed to reach it alive. The wife of Amergin died during the
voyage, and Aranon, a son of Mil, on approaching the land, climbed to
the top of the mast to obtain a better view, and, falling off, was
drowned. The rest disembarked safely upon the first of May.

Amergin was the first to land. lanting his right foot on Irish soil, he
burst into a poem preserved in both the Book of ecan and the Book of
Ballymote. It is a good eample of the pantheistic philosophy of
the eltic races, and a very close parallel to it is contained in an
early Welsh poem, called the Battle of the Trees, and attributed to
the famous bard Taliesin. I am the wind that blows upon the sea,
sang Amergin; I am the ocean wave; I am the murmur of the surges; I am
seven battalions; I am a strong bull; I am an eagle on a rock; I am a
ray of the sun; I am the most beautiful of herbs; I am a courageous wild
boar; I am a salmon in the water; I am a lake upon a plain; I am a
cunning artist; I am a gigantic, sword-wielding champion; I can shift my
shape like a god. In what direction shall we go? Shall we hold our
council in the valley or on the mountain-top? Where shall we make our
home? What land is better than this island of the setting sun? Where
shall we walk to and fro in peace and safety? Who can find you clear
springs of water as I can? Who can tell you the age of the moon but I?
Who can call the fish from the depths of the sea as I can? Who can cause
them to come near the shore as I can? Who can change the shapes of the
hills and headlands as I can? I am a bard who is called upon by
seafarers to prophesy. avelins shall be wielded to avenge our wrongs. I
prophesy victory. I end my song by prophesying all other good
things.

The Welsh bard Taliesin sings in the same strain as the druid Amergin
his unity with, and therefore his power over, all nature, animate and
inanimate. I have been in many shapes, he says, before I attained a
congenial form. I have been a narrow blade of a sword; I have been a
drop in the air; I have been a shining star; I have been a word in a
book; I have been a book in the beginning; I have been a light in a
lantern a year and a half; I have been a bridge for passing over
threescore rivers; I have ourneyed as an eagle; I have been a boat on
the sea; I have been a director in battle; I have been a sword in the
hand; I have been a shield in fight; I have been the string of a harp; I
have been enchanted for a year in the foam of water. There is nothing in
which I have not been. It is strange to find ael and Briton combining
to voice almost in the same words this doctrine of the mystical elts,
who, while still in a state of semi-barbarism, saw, with some of the
greatest of ancient and modern philosophers, the One in the Many, and a
single ssence in all the manifold forms of life.

The Milesians for so, following the Irish annalists, it will be
convenient to call the first aelic settlers in Ireland began their
march on Tara, which was the capital of the Tuatha D Danann, as it had
been in earlier days the chief fortress of the Fir Bolgs, and would in
later days be the dwelling of the high kings of Ireland. On their way
they met with a goddess called Banba, the wife of Mac uill. She greeted
Amergin. If you have come to conquer Ireland, she said, your cause is
no ust one. ertainly it is to conquer it we have come, replied
Amergin, without condescending to argue upon the abstract morality of
the matter. Then at least grant me one thing, she asked. What is
that? replied Amergin. That this island shall be called by my name.
It shall be, replied Amergin.

A little farther on, they met a second goddess, Fotla, the wife of Mac
echt, who made the same request, and received the same answer from
Amergin.

ast of all, at isnech, the centre of Ireland, they came upon the third
of the queens, riu, the wife of Mac rein. Welcome, warriors, she
cried. To you who have come from afar this island shall henceforth
belong, and from the setting to the rising sun there is no better land.
And your race will be the most perfect the world has ever seen. These
are fair words and a good prophecy, said Amergin. It will be no thanks
to you, broke in Donn, Mils eldest son. Whatever success we have we
shall owe to our own strength. That which I prophesy has no concern
with you, retorted the goddess, and neither you nor your descendants
will live to enoy this island. Then, turning to Amergin, she, too,
asked that Ireland might be called after her. It shall be its principal
name, Amergin promised.

And so it has happened. Of the three ancient names of IrelandBanba,
Fotla, and riuthe last, in its genitive form of rinn, is the one
that has survived.

The invaders came to Tara, then called Drumcain, that is, the Beautiful
ill. Mac uill, Mac echt, and Mac rein met them, with all the host
of the aelic gods. As was usual, they held a parley. The people of the
goddess Danu complained that they had been taken by surprise, and the
Milesians admitted that to invade a country without having first warned
its inhabitants was not strictly according to the courtesies of
chivalrous warfare. The Tuatha D Danann proposed to the invaders that
they should leave the island for three days, during which they
themselves would decide whether to fight for their kingdom or to
surrender it; but the Milesians did not care for this, for they knew
that, as soon as they were out of the island, the Tuatha D Danann would
oppose them with druidical enchantments, so that they would not be able
to make a fresh landing. In the end, Mac uill, Mac echt, and Mac
rein offered to submit the matter to the arbitration of Amergin, the
Milesians own lawgiver, with the epress stipulation that, if he gave
an obviously partial udgment, he was to suffer death at their hands.
Donn asked his druid if he were prepared to accept this very delicate
duty. Amergin replied that he was, and at once delivered the first
udgment pronounced by the Milesians in Ireland.

 The men whom we found dwelling in the land, to them is possession due
    by right.
  It is therefore your duty to set out to sea over nine green waves;
  And if you shall be able to effect a landing again in spite of them,
  ou are to engage them in battle, and I adudge to you the land in
     which you found them living.
  I adudge to you the land wherein you found them dwelling, by the right
     of battle.
  But although you may desire the land which these people possess, yet
     yours is the duty to show them ustice.
  I forbid you from inustice to those you have found in the land,
     however you may desire to obtain it.

This udgment was considered fair by both parties. The Milesians retired
to their ships, and waited at a distance of nine waves length from the
land until the signal was given to attack, while the Tuatha D Danann,
drawn up upon the beach, were ready with their druidical spells to
oppose them.

The signal was given, and the Milesians bent to their oars. But they had
hardly started before they discovered that a strong wind was blowing
straight towards them from the shore, so that they could make no
progress. At first they thought it might be a natural breeze, but Donn
smelt magic in it. e sent a man to climb the mast of his ship, and see
if the wind blew as strong at that height as it did at the level of the
sea. The man returned, reporting that the air was quite still up
aloft. vidently it was a druidical wind. But Amergin soon coped with
it. ifting up his voice, he invoked the and of Ireland itself, a power
higher than the gods it sheltered.

                I invoke the land of riu!
                 The shining, shining sea!
                 The fertile, fertile hill!
                 The wooded vale!
                 The river abundant, abundant in water!
                 The fishful, fishful lake!

In such strain runs the original incantation, one of those magic
formulas whose power was held by ancient, and still is held by savage,
races to reside in their eact consecrated wording rather than in their
meaning. To us it sounds nonsense, and so no doubt it did to those who
put the old Irish mythical traditions into literary shape; for a later
version epands and eplains it as follows:

     I implore that we may regain the land of rin,
      We who have come over the lofty waves,
      This land whose mountains are great and etensive,
      Whose streams are clear and numerous,
      Whose woods abound with various fruit,
      Its rivers and waterfalls are large and beautiful,
      Its lakes are broad and widely spread,
      It abounds with fountains on elevated grounds!
      May we gain power and dominion over its tribes!
      May we have kings of our own ruling at Tara!
      May Tara be the regal residence of our many succeeding kings!
      May the Milesians be the conquerors of its people!
      May our ships anchor in its harbours!
      May they trade along the coast of rin!
      May remon be its first ruling monarch!
      May the descendants of Ir and ber be mighty kings!
      I implore that we may regain the land of rin,
                                  I implore!

The incantation proved effectual. The and of Ireland was pleased to be
propitious, and the druidical wind dropped down.

But success was not quite so easy as they had hoped. Manannn, son of
the sea and lord of headlands, shook his magic mantle at them, and
hurled a fresh tempest out over the deep. The galleys of the Milesians
were tossed helplessly on the waves; many sank with their crews. Donn
was among the lost, thus fulfilling rius prophecy, and three other
sons of Mil also perished. In the end, a broken remnant, after long
beating about the coasts, came to shore at the mouth of the iver Boyne.
They landed; and Amergin, from the shore, invoked the aid of the sea as
he had already done that of the land.

                          Sea full of fish!
                           Fertile land!
                           Fish swarming up!
                           Fish there!
                           nder-wave bird!
                           reat fish!
                           rabs hole!
                           Fish swarming up!
                           Sea full of fish!

which, being interpreted like the preceding charm, seems to have meant:

 May the fishes of the sea crowd in shoals to the land for our use!
  May the waves of the sea drive forth to the shore abundance of fish!
  May the salmon swim abundantly into our nets!
  May all kinds of fish come plentifully to us from the sea!
  May its flat-fishes also come in abundance!
  This poem I compose at the sea-shore that fishes may swim in shoals to
     our coast.

Then, gathering their forces, they marched on the people of the goddess
Danu.

Two battles were fought, the first in lenn Faisi, a valley of the
Slieve Mish Mountains, south of Tralee, and the second at Tailtiu, now
called Telltown. In both, the gods were beaten. Their three kings were
killed by the three surviving sons of MilMac uill by ber, Mac echt
by remon, and Mac rein by the druid Amergin. Defeated and
disheartened, they gave in, and, retiring beneath the earth, left the
surface of the land to their conquerors.

From this day begins the history of Ireland according to the annalists.
Mils eldest son, Donn, having perished, the kingdom fell by right to
the second, remon. But ber, the third son, backed by his followers,
insisted upon a partition, and Ireland was divided into two equal parts.
At the end of a year, however, war broke out between the brothers; ber
was killed in battle, and remon took the sole rule.

-----

Footnote :

  It may be noted that, according to Welsh legend, the ancestors of the
  ymri came from wld yr v, the and of Summer, i.e. the eltic
  Other World.

Footnote :

  De Bello allico, Book I, chap. III.

Footnote :

  De ubainville: ycle Mythologique, chap. . hys: ibbert
  ecturesThe aulish antheon.

Footnote :

  eoffrey of Monmouths istoria Britonum, Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  ontained in the Book of einster and other ancient manuscripts.

Footnote :

  Now called the enmare iver.

Footnote :

  This poem and the three following ones, all attributed to Amergin, are
  said to be the oldest Irish literary records.

Footnote :

  Book of Taliesin, poem III, in Skenes Four Ancient Books of Wales,
  ol. I, p. .

Footnote :

  De ubainville: ycle Mythologique. See also the Transactions of
  the Ossianic Society, ol. .

Footnote :

  Translated by rofessor Owen onnellan in ol.  of the Transactions
  of the Ossianic Society.

Footnote :

  The original versions of this and the following charm are from De
  ubainville: ycle Mythologique Irlandais, the later from rofessor
  Owen onnellans translations in ol.  of the Transactions of the
  Ossianic Society. Some of these poems, eplains the rofessor,
  have been glossed by writers or commentators of the Middle Ages,
  without which it would be almost impossible now for any Irish scholar
  to interpret them; and it is proper to remark that the translation
  accompanying them is more in accordance with this gloss than with the
  original tet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               AT I

                           T ODS IN I


But though mortals had conquered gods upon a scale unparalleled in
mythology, they had by no means entirely subdued them. Beaten in battle,
the people of the goddess Danu had yet not lost their divine attributes,
and could use them either to help or hurt. reat was the power of the
Dagda, says a tract preserved in the Book of einster, over the sons
of Mil, even after the conquest of Ireland; for his subects destroyed
their corn and milk, so that they must needs make a treaty of peace with
the Dagda. Not until then, and thanks to his good-will, were they able
to harvest corn and drink the milk of their cows. The basis of
this lost treaty seems to have been that the Tuatha D Danann, though
driven from the soil, should receive homage and offerings from their
successors. We are told in the verse dinnsenchus of Mag Slecht, that

           Since the rule
            Of remon, the noble man of grace,
            There was worshipping of stones
            ntil the coming of good atrick of Macha.

Dispossessed of upper earth, the gods had, however, to seek for new
homes. A council was convened, but its members were divided between two
opinions. One section of them chose to shake the dust of Ireland off its
disinherited feet, and seek refuge in a paradise over-seas, situate in
some unknown, and, ecept for favoured mortals, unknowable island of the
west, the counterpart in aelic myth of the British

                      ... island-valley of Avilion;
            Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
            Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies
            Deep-meadowd, happy, fair with orchard-lawns
            And bowery hollows crownd with summer sea

a land of perpetual pleasure and feasting, described variously as the
and of romise Tir Tairngir, the lain of appiness Mag
Mell, the and of the iving Tir-nam-beo, the and of the
oung Tir-nan-g, and Breasals Island y-Breasail. eltic
mythology is full of the beauties and wonders of this mystic country,
and the tradition of it has never died out. y-Breasail has been set
down on old maps as a reality again and again; some pioneers in the
Spanish seas thought they had discovered it, and called the land they
found Brazil; and it is still said, by lovers of old lore, that a
patient watcher, after long gazing westward from the westernmost shores
of Ireland or Scotland, may sometimes be lucky enough to catch a glimpse
against the sunset of its

      summer isles of den lying in dark-purple spheres of sea.

Of these divine emigrants the principal was Manannn son of r. But,
though he had cast in his lot beyond the seas, he did not cease to visit
Ireland. An old Irish king, Bran, the son of Febal, met him, according
to a seventh-century poem, as Bran ourneyed to, and Manannn from, the
earthly paradise. Bran was in his boat, and Manannn was driving a
chariot over the tops of the waves, and he sang:

         Bran deems it a marvellous beauty
          In his coracle across the clear sea:
          While to me in my chariot from afar
          It is a flowery plain on which he rides about.

         What is a clear sea
          For the prowed skiff in which Bran is,
          That is a happy plain with profusion of flowers
          To me from the chariot of two wheels.

         Bran sees
          The number of waves beating across the clear sea:
          I myself see in Mag Mon
          ed-headed flowers without fault.

         Sea-horses glisten in summer
          As far as Bran has stretched his glance:
          ivers pour forth a stream of honey
          In the land of Manannn son of r.

         The sheen of the main, on which thou art,
          The white hue of the sea, on which thou rowest about,
          ellow and azure are spread out,
          It is land, and is not rough.

         Speckled salmon leap from the womb
          Of the white sea, on which thou lookest:
          They are calves, they are coloured lambs
          With friendliness, without mutual slaughter.

         Though but one chariot-rider is seen
          In Mag Mell of many flowers,
          There are many steeds on its surface,
          Though them thou seest not.

                                                 

         Along the top of a wood has swum
          Thy coracle across ridges,
          There is a wood of beautiful fruit
          nder the prow of thy little skiff.

         A wood with blossom and fruit,
          On which is the vines veritable fragrance;
          A wood without decay, without defect,
          On which are leaves of a golden hue.

And, after this singularly poetical enunciation of the philosophical and
mystical doctrine that all things are, under their diverse forms,
essentially the same, he goes on to describe to Bran the beauties and
pleasures of the eltic lysium.

But there were othersindeed, the most partof the gods who refused to
epatriate themselves. For these residences had to be found, and the
Dagda, their new king, proceeded to assign to each of those who stayed
in Ireland a sdh. These sdhe were barrows, or hillocks, each being
the door to an underground realm of inehaustible splendour and delight,
according to the somewhat primitive ideas of the elts. A description is
given of one which the Dagda kept for himself, and out of which his son
Angus cheated him, which will serve as a fair eample of all. There were
apple-trees there always in fruit, and one pig alive and another ready
roasted, and the supply of ale never failed. One may still visit in
Ireland the sdhe of many of the gods, for the spots are known, and
the traditions have not died out. To r was given Sdh
Fionnachaidh, now known as the ill of the White Field, on the
top of Slieve Fuad, near Newtown amilton, in ounty Armagh. Bodb Derg
received a sdh called by his own name, Sdh Bodb, ust to the
south of ortumna, in alway. Mider was given the sdh of Bri eith,
now called Slieve olry, near Ardagh, in ounty ongford. Ogmas sdh
was called Airceltrai; to ugh was assigned odrubn; Manannns
son, Ilbhreach, received Sdh as Aedha uaidh, now the Mound of
Mullachshee, near Ballyshannon, in Donegal; Fionnbharr had Sdh
Meadha, now nockma, about five miles west of Tuam, where, as present
king of the fairies, he is said to live to-day; while the abodes of
other gods of lesser fame are also recorded. For himself the Dagda
retained two, both near the iver Boyne, in Meath, the best of them
being the famous Brugh-na-Boyne. None of the members of the Tuatha D
Danann were left unprovided for, save one.

It was from this time that the aelic gods received the name by which
the peasantry know them to-dayAes Sdhe, the eople of the ills,
or, more shortly, the Sdhe. very god, or fairy, is a
Fer-Sdhe, a Man of the ill; and every goddess a Bean-Sdhe,
a Woman of the ill, the banshee of popular legend.

The most famous of such fairy hills are about five miles from
Drogheda. They are still connected with the names of the Tuatha D
Danann, though they are now not called their dwelling-places, but their
tombs. On the northern bank of the Boyne stand seventeen barrows, three
of whichnowth, Dowth, and New rangeare of great size. The last
named, largest, and best preserved, is over  feet in diameter, and 
feet high, while its top makes a platform  feet across. It has been
eplored, and oman coins, gold torques, copper pins, and iron rings and
knives have been found in it; but what else it may have once contained
will never be known, for, like nowth and Dowth, it was thoroughly
ransacked by Danish spoilers in the ninth century. It is entered by a
square doorway, the rims of which are elaborately ornamented with a kind
of spiral pattern. This entrance leads to a stone passage, more than 
feet long, which gradually widens and rises, until it opens into a
chamber with a conical dome  feet high. On each side of this central
chamber is a recess, with a shallow oval stone basin in it. The huge
slabs of which the whole is built are decorated upon both the outer and
the inner faces with the same spiral pattern as the doorway.

The origin of these astonishing prehistoric monuments is unknown, but
they are generally attributed to the race that inhabited Ireland before
the elts. azing at marvellous New range, one might very well echo the
words of the old Irish poet Mac Nia, in the Book of Ballymote:

          Behold the Sdh before your eyes,
           It is manifest to you that it is a kings mansion,
           Which was built by the firm Dagda,
           It was a wonder, a court, an admirable hill.

It is not, however, with New range, or even with nowth or Dowth, that
the Dagdas name is now associated. It is a smaller barrow, nearer to
the Boyne, which is known as the Tomb of the Dagda. It has never been
opened, and Dr. ames Fergusson, the author of ude Stone Monuments,
who holds the Tuatha D Danann to have been a real people, thinks that
the bones and armour of the great Dagda may still be found in his
honoured grave. Other eltic scholars might not be so sanguine,
though verses as old as the eleventh century assert that the Tuatha D
Danann used the brughs for burial. It was about this period that the
mythology of Ireland was being rewoven into spurious history. The poem,
which is called the hronicles of the Tombs, not only mentions the
Monument of the Dagda and the Monument of the Morrg, but also
records the last resting-places of Ogma, tain, airpr, ugh, Boann,
and Angus.

We have for the present, however, to consider Angus in a far less
sepulchral light. e is, indeed, very much alive in the story to be
related. The Son of the oung was absent when the distribution of the
sdhe was made. When he returned, he came to his father, the Dagda,
and demanded one. The Dagda pointed out to him that they had all been
given away. Angus protested, but what could be done? By fair means,
evidently nothing; but by craft, a great deal. The wily Angus appeared
to reconcile himself to fate, and only begged his father to allow him to
stay at the sdh of Brugh-na-Boyne New range for a day and a night.
The Dagda agreed to this, no doubt congratulating himself on having got
out of the difficulty so easily. But when he came to Angus to remind him
that the time was up, Angus refused to go. e had been granted, he
claimed, day and night, and it is of days and nights that time and
eternity are composed; therefore there was no limit to his tenure of the
sdh. The logic does not seem very convincing to our modern minds, but
the Dagda is said to have been satisfied with it. e abandoned the best
of his two palaces to his son, who took peaceable possession of it. Thus
it got a second name, that of the Sdh or Brugh of the Son of the
oung.

The Dagda does not, after this, play much active part in the history of
the people of the goddess Danu. We net hear of a council of gods to
elect a fresh ruler. There were five candidates for the vacant
throneBodb the ed, Mider, Ilbhreach son of Manannn, r, and
Angus himself, though the last-named, we are told, had little real
desire to rule, as he preferred a life of freedom to the dignities of
kingship. The Tuatha D Danann went into consultation, and the result of
their deliberation was that their choice fell upon Bodb the ed, for
three reasonsfirstly, for his own sake; secondly, for his father, the
Dagdas sake; and thirdly, because he was the Dagdas eldest son. The
other competitors approved this choice, ecept two. Mider refused to
give hostages, as was the custom, to Bodb Derg, and fled with his
followers to a desert country round Mount einster, in ounty arlow,
while r retired in great anger to Sdh Fionnachaidh, declining to
recognize or obey the new king.

Why r and Mider should have so taken the matter to heart is difficult
to understand, unless it was because they were both among the oldest of
the gods. The indifference of Angus is easier to eplain. e was the
aelic ros, and was busy living up to his character. At this time, the
obect of his love was a maiden who had visited him one night in a
dream, only to vanish when he put out his arms to embrace her. All the
net day, we are told, Angus took no food. pon the following night, the
unsubstantial lady again appeared, and played and sang to him. That
following day, he also fasted. So things went on for a year, while Angus
pined and wasted for love. At last the physicians of the Tuatha D
Danann guessed his complaint, and told him how fatal it might be to him.
Angus asked that his mother Boann might be sent for, and, when she came,
he told her his trouble, and implored her help. She went to the Dagda
and begged him, if he did not wish to see his son die of unrequited
love, a disease that all Diancechts medicine and oibnius magic could
not heal, to find the dream-maiden. The Dagda could do nothing himself,
but he sent to Bodb the ed, and the new king of the gods sent in turn
to the lesser deities of Ireland, ordering all of them to search for
her. For a year she could not be found, but at last the disconsolate
lover received a message, charging him to come and see if he could
recognize the lady of his dreams. Angus came, and knew her at once, even
though she was surrounded by thrice fifty attendant nymphs. er name was
aer, and she was the daughter of tal Ambuel, who had a sdh at
aman, in onnaught. Bodb the ed demanded her for Angus in marriage,
but her father declared that he had no control over her. She was a
swan-maiden, he said; and every year, as soon as summer was over, she
went with her companions to a lake called Dragon-Mouth, and there all
of them became swans. But, refusing to be thus put off, Angus waited in
patience until the day of the magical change, and then went down to the
shore of the lake. There, surrounded by thrice fifty swans, he saw aer,
herself a swan surpassing all the rest in beauty and whiteness. e
called to her, proclaiming his passion and his name, and she promised to
be his bride, if he too would become a swan. e agreed, and with a word
she changed him into swan-shape, and thus they flew side by side to
Anguss sdh, where they retook the human form, and, no doubt, lived
happily as long as could be epected of such changeable immortals as
pagan deities.

Meanwhile, the people of the goddess Danu were ustly incensed against
both r and Mider. Bodb the ed made a yearly war upon Mider in his
sdh, and many of the divine race were killed on either side. But
against r, the new king of the gods refused to move, for there had
been a great affection between them. Many times Bodb Derg tried to
regain rs friendship by presents and compliments, but for a long time
without success.

At last rs wife died, to the sea-gods great sorrow. When Bodb the
ed heard the news, he sent a messenger to r, offering him one of his
own foster-daughters, Aebh, Aeife, and Ailbhe, the
children of Ailioll of Arran. r, touched by this, came to visit Bodb
the ed at his sdh, and chose Aebh for his wife. She is the eldest,
so she must be the noblest of them, he said. They were married, and a
great feast made; and r took her back with him to Sdh Fionnachaidh.

Aebh bore four children to r. The eldest was a daughter called Finola,
the second was a son called Aed; the two others were twin boys called
Fiachra and onn, but in giving birth to those Aebh died.

Bodb the ed then offered r another of his foster-children, and he
chose the second, Aeife. very year r and Aeife and the four children
used to go to Manannns Feast of Age, which was held at each of the
sdhe in turn. The four children grew up to be great favourites among
the people of the goddess Danu.

But Aeife was childless, and she became ealous of rs children; for
she feared that he would love them more than he did her. She brooded
over this until she began, first to hope for, and then to plot their
deaths. She tried to persuade her servants to murder them, but they
would not. So she took the four children to ake Darvra now called
ough Derravargh in West Meath, and sent them into the water to bathe.
Then she made an incantation over them, and touched them, each in turn,
with a druidical wand, and changed them into swans.

But, though she had magic enough to alter their shapes, she had not the
power to take away their human speech and minds. Finola turned, and
threatened her with the anger of r and of Bodb the ed when they came
to hear of it. She, however, hardened her heart, and refused to undo
what she had done. The children of r, finding their case a hopeless
one, asked her how long she intended to keep them in that condition.

ou would be easier in mind, she said, if you had not asked the
question; but I will tell you. ou shall be three hundred years here, on
ake Darvra; and three hundred years upon the Sea of Moyle, which
is between rin and Alba; and three hundred years more at Irros
Domnann and the Isle of lora in rris. et you shall have two
consolations in your troubles; you shall keep your human minds, and yet
suffer no grief at knowing that you have been changed into swans, and
you shall be able to sing the softest and sweetest songs that were ever
heard in the world.

Then Aeife went away and left them. She returned to r, and told him
that the children had fallen by accident into ake Darvra, and were
drowned.

But r was not satisfied that she spoke the truth, and went in haste to
the lake, to see if he could find traces of them. e saw four swans
close to the shore, and heard them talking to one another with human
voices. As he approached, they came out of the water to meet him. They
told him what Aeife had done, and begged him to change them back into
their own shapes. But rs magic was not so powerful as his wifes, and
he could not.

Nor even could Bodb the edto whom r went for help,for all that he
was king of the gods. What Aeife had done could not be undone. But she
could be punished for it! Bodb ordered his foster-daughter to appear
before him, and, when she came, he put an oath on her to tell him truly
what shape of all others, on the earth, or above the earth, or beneath
the earth, she most abhorred, and into which she most dreaded to be
transformed. Aeife was obliged to answer that she most feared to become
a demon of the air. So Bodb the ed struck her with his wand, and she
fled from them, a shrieking demon.

All the Tuatha D Danann went to ake Darvra to visit the four swans.
The Milesians heard of it, and also went; for it was not till long after
this that gods and mortals ceased to associate. The visit became a
yearly feast. But, at the end of three hundred years, the children of
r were compelled to leave ake Darvra, and go to the Sea of Moyle, to
fulfil the second period of their eile.

They bade farewell to gods and men, and went. And, for fear lest they
might be hurt by anyone, the Milesians made it law in Ireland that no
man should harm a swan, from that time forth for ever.

The children of r suffered much from tempest and cold on the stormy
Sea of Moyle, and they were very lonely. Once only during that long
three hundred years did they see any of their friends. An embassy of the
Tuatha D Danann, led by two sons of Bodb the ed, came to look for
them, and told them all that had happened in rin during their eile.

At last that long penance came to an end, and they went to Irros Domnann
and Innis lora for their third stage. And while it was wearily dragging
through, Saint atrick came to Ireland, and put an end to the power of
the gods for ever. They had been banned and banished when the children
of r found themselves free to return to their old home. Sdh
Fionnechaidh was empty and deserted, for r had been killed by aoilt,
the cousin of Finn mac oul.

So, after long, vain searching for their lost relatives, they gave up
hope, and returned to the Isle of lora. They had a friend there, the
onely rane of Inniskea, which has lived upon that island ever
since the beginning of the world, and will be still sitting there on the
day of udgment. They saw no one else until, one day, a man came to the
island. e told them that he was Saint aemhoc, and that he had
heard their story. e brought them to his church, and preached the new
faith to them, and they believed on hrist, and consented to be
baptised. This broke the pagan spell, and, as soon as the holy water was
sprinkled over them, they returned to human shape. But they were very
old and bowedthree aged men and an ancient woman. They did not live
long after this, and Saint aemhoc, who had baptised them, buried them
all together in one grave.

But, in telling this story, we have leaped nine hundred yearsa great
space in the history even of gods. We must retrace our steps, if not
quite to the days of remon and ber, sons of Mil, and first kings of
Ireland, at any rate to the beginning of the hristian era.

At this time ochaid Airem was high king of Ireland, and reigned at
Tara; while, under him, as vassal monarchs, onchobar mac Nessa ruled
over the ed Branch hampions of lster; uroi son of Daire, was
king of Munster; Mesgegra was king of einster; and Ailell, with his
famous queen, Medb, governed onnaught.

Shortly before, among the gods, Angus Son of the oung, had stolen away
tain, the wife of Mider. e kept her imprisoned in a bower of glass,
which he carried everywhere with him, never allowing her to leave it,
for fear Mider might recapture her. The aelic luto, however, found out
where she was, and was laying plans to rescue her, when a rival of
tains herself decoyed Angus away from before the pleasant
prison-house, and set his captive free. But, instead of returning her to
Mider, she changed the luckless goddess into a fly, and threw her into
the air, where she was tossed about in great wretchedness at the mercy
of every wind.

At the end of seven years, a gust blew her on to the roof of the house
of tair, one of the vassals of onchobar, who was celebrating a feast.
The unhappy fly, who was tain, was blown down the chimney into the room
below, and fell, ehausted, into a golden cup full of beer, which the
wife of the master of the house was ust going to drink. And the woman
drank tain with the beer.

But, of course, this was not the end of herfor the gods cannot really
die,but only the beginning of a new life. tain was reborn as the
daughter of tairs wife, no one knowing that she was not of mortal
lineage. She grew up to be the most beautiful woman in Ireland.

When she was twenty years old, her fame reached the high king, who sent
messengers to see if she was as fair as men reported. They saw her, and
returned to the king full of her praises. So ochaid himself went to pay
her a visit. e chose her to be his queen, and gave her a splendid
dowry.

It was not till then that Mider heard of her. e came to her in the
shape of a young man, beautifully dressed, and told her who she really
was, and how she had been his wife among the people of the goddess Danu.
e begged her to leave the king, and come with him to his sdh at Bri
eith. But tain refused with scorn.

Do you think, she said, that I would give up the high king of Ireland
for a person whose name and kindred I do not know, ecept from his own
lips?

The god retired, baffled for the time. But one day, as ing ochaid sat
in his hall, a stranger entered. e was dressed in a purple tunic, his
hair was like gold, and his eyes shone like candles.

The king welcomed him.

But who are you? he asked; for I do not know you.

et I have known you a long time, returned the stranger.

Then what is your name?

Not a very famous one. I am Mider of Bri eith.

Why have you come here?

To challenge you to a game of chess.

I am a good chess-player, replied the king, who was reputed to be the
best in Ireland.

I think I can beat you, answered Mider.

But the chess-board is in the queens room, and she is asleep,
obected ochaid.

It does not matter, replied Mider. I have brought a board with me
which can be in no way worse than yours.

e showed it to the king, who admitted that the boast was true. The
chess-board was made of silver set in precious stones, and the pieces
were of gold.

lay! said Mider to the king.

I never play without a wager, replied ochaid.

What shall be the stake? asked Mider.

I do not care, replied ochaid.

ood! returned Mider. et it be that the loser pays whatever the
winner demands.

That is a wager fit for a king, said ochaid.

They played, and Mider lost. The stake that ochaid claimed from him was
that Mider and his subects should make a road through Ireland. ochaid
watched the road being made, and noticed how Miders followers yoked
their oen, not by the horns, as the aels did, but at the shoulders,
which was better. e adopted the practice, and thus got his nickname,
Airem, that is, The loughman.

After a year, Mider returned and challenged the king again, the terms to
be the same as before. ochaid agreed with oy; but, this time, he lost.

I could have beaten you before, if I had wished, said Mider, and now
the stake I demand is tain, your queen.

The astonished king, who could not for shame go back upon his word,
asked for a years delay. Mider agreed to return upon that day year to
claim tain. ochaid consulted with his warriors, and they decided to
keep watch through the whole of the day fied by Mider, and let no one
pass in or out of the royal palace till sunset. For ochaid held that if
the fairy king could not get tain upon that one day, his promise would
be no longer binding on him.

So, when the day came, they barred the door and guarded it, but suddenly
they saw Mider among them in the hall. e stood beside tain, and sang
this song to her, setting out the pleasures of the homes of the gods
under the enchanted hills.

       O fair lady! will you come with me
        To a wonderful country which is mine,
        Where the peoples hair is of golden hue,
        And their bodies the colour of virgin snow?

       There no grief or care is known;
        White are their teeth, black their eyelashes;
        Delight of the eye is the rank of our hosts,
        With the hue of the fo-glove on every cheek.

       rimson are the flowers of every mead,
        racefully speckled as the blackbirds egg;
        Though beautiful to see be the plains of Inisfail
        They are but commons compared to our great plains.

       Though intoicating to you be the ale-drink of Inisfail,
        More intoicating the ales of the great country;
        The only land to praise is the land of which I speak,
        Where no one ever dies of decrepit age.

       Soft sweet streams traverse the land;
        The choicest of mead and of wine;
        Beautiful people without any blemish;
        ove without sin, without wickedness.

       We can see the people upon all sides,
        But by no one can we be seen;
        The cloud of Adams transgression it is
        That prevents them from seeing us.

       O lady, should you come to my brave land,
        It is golden hair that will be on your head;
        Fresh pork, beer, new milk, and ale,
        ou there with me shall have, O fair lady!

Then Mider greeted ochaid, and told him that he had come to take away
tain, according to the kings wager. And, while the king and his
warriors looked on helplessly, he placed one arm round the now willing
woman, and they both vanished. This broke the spell that hung over
everyone in the hall; they rushed to the door, but all they could see
were two swans flying away.

The king would not, however, yield to the god. e sent to every part of
Ireland for news of tain, but his messengers all came back without
having been able to find her. At last, a druid named Daln learned, by
means of ogams carved upon wands of yew, that she was hidden under
Miders sdh of Bri eith. So ochaid marched there with an army, and
began to dig deep into the abode of the gods of which the fairy hill
was the portal. Mider, as terrified as was the reek god ades when it
seemed likely that the earth would be rent open, and his domains
laid bare to the sight, sent out fifty fairy maidens to ochaid, every
one of them having the appearance of tain. But the king would only be
content with the real tain, so that Mider, to save his sdh, was at
last obliged to give her up. And she lived with the ing of Ireland
after that until the death of both of them.

But Mider never forgave the insult. e bided his time for three
generations, until ochaid and tain had a male descendant. For they had
no son, but only a daughter called tain, like her mother, and this
second tain had a daughter called Messbuachallo, who had a son called
onair, surnamed the reat. Mider and the gods wove the web of fate
round onair, so that he and all his men died violent deaths.

-----

Footnote :

  De ubainville: ycle Mythologique Irlandais, p. .

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe eligion of the Ancient Britons and Druidism.

Footnote :

  Tennyson: Idylls of the ing: The assing of Arthur.

Footnote :

  See Wood-Martin: Traces of the lder Faiths of Ireland, ol I, pp.
  -.

Footnote :

  The following verses are taken from Dr. uno Meyers translation of
  the romance entitled The oyage of Bran, Son of Febal, published in
  Mr. Nutts rimm ibrary, ol. I.

Footnote :

  The lain of Sports.

Footnote :

  The appy lain.

Footnote :

  ronounced Shee Finneha.

Footnote :

  ronounced Shee Bove.

Footnote :

  ronounced Shee Assaroe.

Footnote :

  ronounced Finnvar.

Footnote :

  ronounced Far-shee.

Footnote :

  Ourry: ectures on the MS. Materials of Ancient Irish istory,
  Appendi, p. .

Footnote :

  See Fergusson: ude Stone Monuments, pp. -.

Footnote :

  Ourry: MS. Materials, p. .

Footnote :

  Fergusson: ude Stone Monuments, p. .

Footnote :

  This story is contained in the Book of einster.

Footnote :

  ronounced Ilbrec.

Footnote :

  This story, called the Dream of Angus, will be found translated into
  nglish by Dr. dward Mller in ol. III. of the evue eltique,
  from an eighteenth-century MS. in the British Museum.

Footnote :

  ronounced Aive.

Footnote :

  ronounced Aiva.

Footnote :

  ronounced Alva.

Footnote :

  Now called North hannel.

Footnote :

  The eninsula of rris, in Mayo.

Footnote :

  A small island off Benmullet.

Footnote :

  See chap. IFinn and the Fenians.

Footnote :

  An island off the coast of Mayo. Its lonely crane was one of the
  Wonders of Ireland, and is still an obect of folk-belief.

Footnote :

  ronounced emoc.

Footnote :

  This famous story of the Fate of the hildren of r is not found in
  any MS. earlier than the beginning of the seventeenth century. A
  translation of it has been published by ugene Ourry in Atlantis,
  ol. I, from which the present abridgment is made.

Footnote :

  ronounced Dara.

Footnote :

  A poetical name for Ireland.

Footnote :

  Translated by Ourry, Manners and ustoms of the Ancient Irish,
  ecture I, p. , .

Footnote :

  Iliad, Book .

Footnote :

  The story of Miders revenge and onairs death is told in the
  romance Bruidhen D Derga, The Destruction of Da Dergas Fort,
  translated by Dr. Whitley Stokes, ugene Ourry, and rofessor immer
  from the original tet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT II

                            T IIS IIAD


With ber and remon, sons of Mil, and conquerors of the gods, begins a
fresh series of characters in aelic traditionthe early Milesian
kings of Ireland. Though monkish chroniclers have striven to find
history in the legends handed down concerning them, they are none the
less almost as mythical as the Tuatha D Danann. The first of them who
has the least appearance of reality is Tigernmas, who is recorded to
have reigned a hundred years after the coming of the Milesians. e seems
to have been what is sometimes called a ulture-king, bearing much the
same kind of relation to Ireland as Theseus bore to Athens or Minos to
rete. During his reign, nine new lakes and three new rivers broke forth
from beneath the earth to give their waters to rin. nder his auspices,
gold was first smelted, ornaments of gold and silver were first made,
and clothes first dyed. e is said to have perished mysteriously
with three-fourths of the men of rin while worshipping romm ruaich on
the field of Mag Slecht. In him Mr. Nutt sees, no doubt rightly, the
great mythical king who, in almost all national histories, closes the
strictly mythological age, and inaugurates a new era of less obviously
divine, if hardly less apocryphal characters.

In spite, however, of the worship of the Tuatha D Danann instituted by
remon, we find the early kings and heroes of Ireland walking very
familiarly with their gods. ochaid Airem, high king of Ireland, was
apparently reckoned a perfectly fit suitor for the goddess tain, and
proved a far from unsuccessful rival of Mider, the aelic luto.
And adventures of love or war were carried quite as cheerfully among the
sdh dwellers by ochaids contemporariesonchobar son of Nessa, ing
of lster, uroi son of Daire, ing of Munster, Mesgegra, ing of
einster, and Ailell and Medb, ing and ueen of onnaught.

All these figures of the second aelic cycle that of the heroes of
lster, and especially of their great champion, uchulainn lived,
according to Irish tradition, at about the beginning of the hristian
era. onchobar, indeed, is said to have epired in a fit of rage on
hearing of the death of hrist.

But this is a very transparent monkish interpolation into the original
story. A quite different view is taken by most modern scholars, who
would see gods and not men in all the legendary characters of the eltic
heroic cycles. pon such a subect, however, one may legitimately take
sides. Were ing onchobar and his ltonian champions, Finn and his
Fenians, Arthur and his nights once living men round whom the
attributes of gods have gathered, or were they ancient deities renamed
and stripped of some of their divinity to make them more akin to their
human worshippers? istory or mythology? A mingling, perhaps, of both.
uchulainn may have been the name of a real aelic warrior, however
suspiciously he may now resemble the sun-god, who is said to have been
his father. ing onchobar may have been the real chief of a tribe of
Irish elts before he became an adumbration of the aelic sky-god. It is
the same problem that confronts us in dealing with the heroic legends of
reece and ome. Were Achilles, Agamemnon, Odysseus, aris, neas gods,
demi-gods, or men? et us call them all alikewhether they be reek or
Troan heroes, ed Branch hampions, or followers of the aelic Finn or
the British Arthurdemi-gods. ven so, they stand definitely apart from
the older gods who were greater than they were.

We are stretching no point in calling them demi-gods, for they were
god-descended. uchulainn, the greatest hero of the lster cycle,
was doubly so; for on his mothers side he was the grandson of the
Dagda, while ugh of the ong and is said to have been his father. is
mother, Dechtir, daughter of Maga, the daughter of Angus Son of the
oung, was half-sister to ing onchobar, and all the other principal
heroes were of hardly less lofty descent. It is small wonder that they
are described in ancient manuscripts as terrestrial gods and
goddesses.

Terrestrial they may have been in form, but their acts were
superhuman. Indeed, compared with the more modest eploits of the heroes
of the Iliad, they were those of giants. Where reek warriors slew
their tens, these ltonians despatched their hundreds. They came home
after such eploits so heated that their cold baths boiled over. When
they sat down to meat, they devoured whole oen, and drank their mead
from vats. With one stroke of their favourite swords they beheaded hills
for sport. The gods themselves hardly did more, and it is easy to
understand that in those old days not only might the sons of gods look
upon the daughters of men and find them fair, but immortal women also
need not be too proud to form passing alliances with mortal men.

Some of the older deities seem to have already passed out of memory at
the time of the compilation of the lster cycle. At any rate, they make
no appearance in it. Dead Nuada rests in the grianan of Aileach; Ogma
lies low in sdh Airceltrai; while the Dagda, thrust into the
background by his son Angus, mies himself very little in the affairs of
rin. But the Morrg is no less eager in encouraging human or
semi-divine heroes to war than she was when she revived the fainting
spirits of the folk of the goddess Danu at the Battle of Moytura. The
gods who appear most often in the cycle of the ed Branch of lster are
the same that have lived on throughout with the most persistent
vitality. ugh the ong-handed, Angus of the Brugh, Mider, Bodb the ed,
and Manannn son of r, are the principal deities that move in the
background of the stage where the chief parts are now played by mortals.
But, to make up for the loss of some of the greater divine figures, the
ranks of the gods are being recruited from below. All manner of inferior
divinities claim to be members of the tribe of the goddess Danu. The
goblins and sprites and demons of the air who shrieked around battles
are described collectively as Tuatha D Danann.

As for the Fomors, they have lost their distinctive names, though they
are still recognized as dwellers beneath the deep, who at times raid
upon the coast, and do battle with the heroes over whom onchobar ruled
at main Macha.

This seat of his government, the traditionary site of which is still
marked by an etensive prehistoric entrenchment called Navan Fort,
near Armagh, was the centre of an lster that stretched southwards as
far as the Boyne, and round its ruler gathered such a galay of warriors
as Ireland had never seen before, or will again. They called themselves
the hampions of the ed Branch; there was not one of them who was not
a hero; but they are all dwarfed by one splendid figureuchulainn,
whose name means ulanns ound. Mr. Alfred Nutt calls him the Irish
Achilles, while rofessor hys would rather see in him a eracles
of the aels. ike Achilles, he was the chosen hero of his people,
invincible in battle, and yet at once to early death and sorrows doomed
beyond the lot of man, while, like eracles, his life was a series of
wonderful eploits and labours. It matters little enough; for the lives
of all such mythical heroes must be of necessity somewhat alike.

If Achilles and eracles were, as some think, personifications of the
sun, uchulainn is not less so. Most of his attributes, as the old
stories record them, are obviously solar symbols. e seemed generally
small and insignificant, yet, when he was at his full strength, no one
could look him in the face without blinking, while the heat of his
constitution melted snow for thirty feet all round him. e turned red
and hissed as he dipped his body into its baththe sea. Terrible was his
transformation when sorely oppressed by his enemies, as the sun is by
mist, storm, or eclipse. At such times among the arial clouds over his
head were visible the virulent pouring showers and sparks of ruddy fire
which the seething of his savage wrath caused to mount up above him. is
hair became tangled about his head, as it had been branches of a red
thorn-bush stuffed into a strongly-fenced gap.... Taller, thicker, more
rigid, longer than mast of a great ship was the perpendicular et of
dusky blood which out of his scalps very central point shot upwards and
then was scattered to the four cardinal points; whereby was formed a
magic mist of gloom resembling the smoky pall that drapes a regal
dwelling, what time a king at nightfall of a winters day draws near to
it.

So marvellous a being was, of course, of marvellous birth. is
mother, Dechtir, was on the point of being married to an lster
chieftain called Sualtam, and was sitting at the wedding-feast, when a
may-fly flew into her cup of wine and was unwittingly swallowed by her.
That same afternoon she fell into a deep sleep, and in her dream the
sun-god ugh appeared to her, and told her that it was he whom she had
swallowed, and bore within her. e ordered her and her fifty attendant
maidens to come with him at once, and he put upon them the shapes of
birds, so that they were not seen to go. Nothing was heard of them
again. But one day, months later, a flock of beautiful birds appeared
before main Macha, and drew out its warriors in their chariots to hunt
them.

They followed the birds till nightfall, when they found themselves at
the Brugh on the Boyne, where the great gods had their homes. As they
looked everywhere for shelter, they suddenly saw a splendid palace. A
tall and handsome man, richly dressed, came out and welcomed them and
led them in. Within the hall were a beautiful and noble-faced woman and
fifty maidens, and on the tables were the richest meats and wines, and
everything fit for the needs of warriors. So they rested there the
night, and, during the night, they heard the cry of a new-born child.
The net morning, the man told them who he was, and that the woman was
onchobars half-sister Dechtir, and he ordered them to take the child,
and bring it up among the warriors of lster. So they brought him back,
together with his mother and the maidens, and Dechtir married Sualtam,
and all the chiefs, champions, druids, poets, and lawgivers of lster
vied with one another in bringing up the mysterious infant.

At first they called him Setanta; and this is how he came to change his
name. While still a child, he was the strongest of the boys of main
Macha, and the champion in their sports. One day he was playing hurley
single-handed against all the others, and beating them, when onchobar
the ing rode by with his nobles on the way to a banquet given by
ulann, the chief smith of the ltonians. onchobar called to the boy,
inviting him to go with them, and he replied that, when the game was
finished, he would follow. As soon as the lster champions were in
ulanns hall, the smith asked the kings leave to unloose his terrible
watch-dog, which was as strong and fierce as a hundred hounds; and
onchobar, forgetting that the boy was to follow them, gave his
permission. Immediately the hound saw Setanta coming, it rushed at him,
open-mouthed. But the boy flung his playing-ball into its mouth, and
then, seizing it by the hind-legs, dashed it against a rock till he had
killed it.

The smith ulann was very angry at the death of his dog; for there was
no other hound in the world like him for guarding a house and flocks. So
Setanta promised to find and train up another one, not less good, for
ulann, and, until it was trained, to guard the smiths house as though
he were a dog himself. This is why he was called uchulainn, that is,
ulanns ound; and athbad the Druid prophesied that the time would
come when the name would be in every mans mouth.

Not long after this, uchulainn overheard athbad giving druidical
instruction, and one of his pupils asking him what that day would be
propitious for. athbad replied that, if any young man first took arms
on that day, his name would be greater than that of any other heros,
but his life would be short. At once, the boy went to ing onchobar,
and demanded arms and a chariot. onchobar asked him who had put such a
thought into his head; and he answered that it was athbad the Druid. So
onchobar gave him arms and armour, and sent him out with a charioteer.
That evening, uchulainn brought back the heads of three champions who
had killed many of the warriors of lster. e was then only seven years
old.

The women of lster so loved uchulainn after this that the warriors
grew ealous, and insisted that a wife should be found for him. But
uchulainn was very hard to please. e would have only one, mer,
the daughter of Forgall the Wily, the best maiden in Ireland for the si
giftsthe gift of beauty, the gift of voice, the gift of sweet speech,
the gift of needlework, the gift of wisdom, and the gift of chastity. So
he went to woo her, but she laughed at him for a boy. Then uchulainn
swore by the gods of his people that he would make his name known
wherever the deeds of heroes were spoken of, and mer promised to marry
him if he could take her from her warlike kindred.

When Forgall, her father, came to know of this betrothal, he devised a
plan to put an end to it. e went to visit ing onchobar at main
Macha. There he pretended to have heard of uchulainn for the first
time, and he saw him do all his feats. e said, loud enough to be
overheard by all, that if so promising a youth dared to go to the Island
of Scathach the Amazon, in the east of Alba, and learn all her
warrior-craft, no living man would be able to stand before him. It was
hard to reach Scathachs Isle, and still harder to return from it, and
Forgall felt certain that, if uchulainn went, he would get his death
there.

Of course, nothing would now satisfy uchulainn but going. is two
friends, aegaire the Battle-winner and onall the ictorious, said that
they would go with him. But, before they had gone far, they lost heart
and turned back. uchulainn went on alone, crossing the lain of
Ill-uck, where mens feet stuck fast, while sharp grasses sprang up and
cut them, and through the erilous lens, full of devouring wild beasts,
until he came to the Bridge of the liff, which rose on end, till it
stood straight up like a ships mast, as soon as anyone put foot on it.
Three times uchulainn tried to cross it, and thrice he failed. Then
anger came into his heart, and a magic halo shone round his head, and he
did his famous feat of the heros salmon leap, and landed, in one
ump, on the middle of the bridge, and then slid down it as it rose up
on end.

Scathach was in the dn, with her two sons. uchulainn went to her,
and put his sword to her breast, and threatened to kill her if she would
not teach him all her own skill in arms. So he became her pupil, and she
taught him all her war-craft. In return, uchulainn helped her against a
rival queen of the Amazons, called Aoife. e conquered Aoife, and
compelled her to make peace with Scathach.

Then he returned to Ireland, and went in a scythed chariot to Forgalls
palace. e leaped over its triple walls, and slew everyone who came near
him. Forgall met his death in trying to escape uchulainns rage. e
found mer, and placed her in his chariot, and drove away; and, every
time that Forgalls warriors came up to them, he turned, and slew a
hundred, and put the rest to flight. e reached main Macha in safety,
and he and mer were married there.

And so great, after this, were the fame of uchulainns prowess and
mers beauty that the men and women of lster yielded them
precedencehim among the warriors and her among the womenin every feast
and banquet at main Macha.

But all that uchulainn had done up to this time was as nothing to the
deeds he did in the great war which all the rest of Ireland, headed by
Ailill and Medb, ing and ueen of onnaught, made upon lster, to get
the Brown Bull of ualgne. This Bull was one of two, of fairy
descent. They had originally been the swineherds of two of the gods,
Bodb, ing of the Sdhe of Munster, and Ochall Ochne, ing of the Sdhe
of onnaught. As swineherds they were in perpetual rivalry; then, the
better to carry on their quarrel, they changed themselves into two
ravens, and fought for a year; net they turned into water-monsters,
which tore one another for a year in the Suir and a year in the Shannon;
then they became human again and fought as champions; and ended by
changing into eels. One of these eels went into the iver ruind, in
ualgne, in lster, where it was swallowed by a cow belonging to
Daire of ualgne, and the other into the spring of aran arad, in
onnaught, where it passed into the belly of a cow of ueen Medbs. Thus
were born those two famous beasts, the Brown Bull of lster and the
White-horned Bull of onnaught.

Now the White-horned was of such proud mind that he scorned to belong to
a woman, and he went out of Medbs herds into those of her husband
Ailill. So that when Ailill and Medb one day, in their idleness, counted
up their possessions, to set them off one against the other, although
they were equal in every other thing, in ewels and clothes and
household vessels, in sheep and horses and swine and cattle, Medb had no
one bull that was worthy to be set beside Ailills White-horned.
efusing to be less in anything than her husband, the proud queen sent
heralds, with gifts and compliments, to Daire, asking him to lend her
the Brown Bull for a year. Daire would have done so gladly had not one
of Medbs messengers been heard boasting in his cups that, if Daire had
not lent the Brown Bull of his own free-will, Medb would have taken it.
This was reported to Daire, who at once swore that she should never have
it. Medbs messenger returned; and the ueen of onnaught, furious at
his refusal, vowed that she would take it by force.

She assembled the armies of all the rest of Ireland to go against
lster, and made Fergus son of oy, an lster champion who had
quarrelled with ing onchobar, its leader. They epected to have an
easy victory, for the warriors of lster were at that time lying under a
magic weakness which fell upon them for many days in each year, as the
result of a curse laid upon them, long before, by a goddess who had been
insulted by one of onchobars ancestors. Medb called up a prophetess of
her people to foretell victory. ow do you see our hosts? asked the
queen of the seeress. I see crimson on them; I see red, she replied.
But the warriors of lster are lying in their sickness. Nay, how do you
see our men? I see them all crimson; I see them all red, she
repeated. And then she added to the astonished queen, who had epected a
quite different foretelling: For I see a small man doing deeds of arms,
though there are many wounds on his smooth skin; the hero-light shines
round his head, and there is victory on his forehead; he is richly
clothed, and young and beautiful and modest, but he is a dragon in
battle. is appearance and his valour are those of uchulainn of
Muirthemne; who that ulanns hound from Muirthemne may be, I do not
know; but I know this, that all our army will be reddened by him. e is
setting out for battle; he will hew down your hosts; the slaughter he
shall make will be long remembered; there will be many women crying over
the bodies mangled by the ound of the Forge whom I see before me
now. For uchulainn was, for some reason unknown to us, the only
man in lster who was not subect to the magic weakness, and therefore
it fell upon him to defend lster single-handed against the whole of
Medbs army.

In spite of the inury done him by ing onchobar, Fergus still kept a
love for his own country. e had not the heart to march upon the
ltonians without first secretly sending a messenger to warn them. So
that, though all the other champions of the ed Branch were helpless,
uchulainn was watching the marches when the army came.

Now begins the story of the aristeia of the aelic hero. It is, after
the manner of epics, the record of a series of single combats, in each
of which uchulainn slays his adversary. Man after man comes against
him, and not one goes back. In the intervals between these duels,
uchulainn harasses the army with his sling, slaying a hundred men a
day. e kills Medbs pet dog, bird, and squirrel, and creates such
terror that no one dares to stir out of the camp. Medb herself has a
narrow escape; for one of her serving-women, who puts on her mistresss
golden head-dress, is killed by a stone flung from uchulainns sling.

The great queen determines to see with her own eyes this marvellous hero
who is holding all her warriors at bay. She sends an envoy, asking him
to come and parley with her. uchulainn agrees, and, at the meeting,
Medb is amazed at his boyish look. She finds it hard to believe that it
is this beardless stripling of seventeen who is killing her champions,
until the whole army seems as though it were melting away. She offers
him her own friendship and great honours and possessions in onnaught if
he will forsake onchobar. e refuses; but she offers it again and
again. At last uchulainn indignantly declares that the net man who
comes with such a message will do so at his peril. One bargain, however,
he will make. e is willing to fight one of the men of Ireland every
day, and, while the duel lasts, the main army may march on; but, as soon
as uchulainn has killed his man, it must halt until the net day. Medb
agrees to this, thinking it better to lose one man a day than a hundred.

Medb makes the same offer to every famous warrior, to induce him to go
against uchulainn. The reward for the head of the champion will be the
hand of her daughter, Findabair. In spite of this, not one of the
aspirants to the princess can stand before uchulainn. All perish; and
Findabair, when she finds out how she is being promised to a fresh
suitor every day, dies of shame. But, while uchulainn is engaged in
these combats, Medb sends men who scour lster for the brown bull, and
find him, and drive him, with fifty heifers, into her camp.

Meanwhile the s Sdhe, the fairy god-clan, are watching the
half-divine, half-mortal hero, amazed at his achievements. is eploits
kindle love in the fierce heart of the Morrg, the great war-goddess.
uchulainn is awakened from sleep by a terrible shout from the north. e
orders his driver, aeg, to yoke the horses to his chariot, so that he
may find out who raised it. They go in the direction from which the
sound had come, and meet with a woman in a chariot drawn by a red horse.
She has red eyebrows, and a red dress, and a long, red cloak, and she
carries a great, gray spear. e asks her who she is, and she tells him
that she is a kings daughter, and that she has fallen in love with him
through hearing of his eploits. uchulainn says that he has other
things to think of than love. She replies that she has been giving him
her help in his battles, and will still do so; and uchulainn answers
that he does not need any womans help. Then, says she, if you will
not have my love and help, you shall have my hatred and enmity. When you
are fighting with a warrior as good as yourself, I will come against you
in various shapes and hinder you, so that he shall have the advantage.
uchulainn draws his sword, but all he sees is a hoodie crow sitting on
a branch. e knows from this that the red woman in the chariot was the
great queen of the gods.

The net day, a warrior named och went to meet uchulainn. At first he
refused to fight one who was beardless; so uchulainn smeared his chin
with blackberry uice, until it looked as though he had a beard. While
uchulainn was fighting och, the Morrg came against him three
timesfirst as a heifer which tried to overthrow him, and net as an eel
which got beneath his feet as he stood in running water, and then as a
wolf which seized hold of his right arm. But uchulainn broke the
heifers leg, and trampled upon the eel, and put out one of the wolfs
eyes, though, every one of these three times, och wounded him. In the
end, uchulainn slew och with his invincible spear, the gae
bolg, made of a sea-monsters bones. The Morrg came back to
uchulainn, disguised as an old woman, to have her wounds healed by him,
for no one could cure them but he who had made them. She became his
friend after this, and helped him.

But the fighting was so continuous that uchulainn got no sleep, ecept
ust for a while, from time to time, when he might rest a little, with
his head on his hand and his hand on his spear and his spear on his
knee. So that his father, ugh the ong-handed, took pity on him and
came to him in the semblance of a tall, handsome man in a green cloak
and a gold-embroidered silk shirt, and carrying a black shield and a
five-pronged spear. e put him into a sleep of three days and three
nights, and, while he rested, he laid druidical herbs on to all his
wounds, so that, in the end, he rose up again completely healed and as
strong as at the very beginning of the war. While he was asleep, the
boy-troop of main Macha, uchulainns old companions, came and fought
instead of him, and slew three times their own number, but were all
killed.

It was at this time that Medb asked Fergus to go and fight with
uchulainn. Fergus answered that he would never fight against his own
foster-son. Medb asked him again and again, and at last he went, but
without his famous sword. Fergus, my guardian, said uchulainn, it is
not safe for you to come out against me without your sword. If I had
the sword, replied Fergus, I would not use it on you. Then Fergus
asked uchulainn, for the sake of all he had done for him in his
boy-hood, to pretend to fight with him, and then give way before him and
run away. uchulainn answered that he was very loth to be seen running
from any man. But Fergus promised uchulainn that, if uchulainn would
run away from Fergus then, Fergus would run away from uchulainn at some
future time, whenever uchulainn wished. uchulainn agreed to this, for
he knew that it would be for the profit of lster. So they fought a
little, and then uchulainn turned and fled in the sight of all Medbs
army. Fergus went back; and Medb could not reproach him any more.

But she cast about to find some other way of vanquishing uchulainn. The
agreement made had been that only one man a day should be sent against
him. But now Medb sent the wizard alatin with his twenty-seven sons and
his grandson all at once, for she said they are really only one, for
they are all from alatins body. They never missed a throw with their
poisoned spears, and every man they hit died, either on the spot or
within the week. When Fergus heard of this, he was in great grief, and
he sent a man called Fiacha, an eile, like himself, from lster, to
watch the fight and report how it went. Now Fiacha did not mean to oin
in it, but when he saw uchulainn assailed by twenty-nine at a time, and
overpowered, he could not restrain himself. So he drew his sword and
helped uchulainn, and, between them, they killed alatin and his whole
family.

As a last resource, now, Medb sent for Ferdiad, who was the great
champion of the Iberian Men of Domnu, who had thrown in their lot with
Medb in the war for the Brown Bull. Ferdiad had been a companion and
fellow-pupil of uchulainn with Scathach, and he did not wish to fight
with him. But Medb told him that, if he refused, her satirists should
make such lampoons on him that he would die of shame, and his name would
be a reproach for ever. She also offered him great rewards and honours,
and bound herself in si sureties to keep her promises. At last,
reluctantly, he went.

uchulainn saw him coming, and went out to welcome him; but Ferdiad said
that he had not come as a friend, but to fight. Now uchulainn had been
Ferdiads unior and serving-boy in Scathachs Island, and he begged him
by the memory of those old times to go back; but Ferdiad said he could
not. They fought all day, and neither had gained any advantage by
sunset. So they kissed one another, and each went back to his camp.
Ferdiad sent half his food and drink to uchulainn, and uchulainn sent
half his healing herbs and medicines to Ferdiad, and their horses were
put in the same stable, and their charioteers slept by the same fire.
And so it happened on the second day. But at the end of the third day
they parted gloomily, knowing that on the morrow one of them must fall;
and their horses were not put in the same stall that night, neither did
their charioteers sleep at the same fire. On the fourth day, uchulainn
succeeded in killing Ferdiad, by casting the gae bolg at him from
underneath. But when he saw that he was dying, the battle-fury passed
away, and he took his old companion up in his arms, and carried him
across the river on whose banks they had fought, so that he might be
with the men of lster in his death, and not with the men of Ireland.
And he wept over him, and said: It was all a game and a sport until
Ferdiad came; Oh, Ferdiad! your death will hang over me like a cloud for
ever. esterday he was greater than a mountain; to-day he is less than a
shadow.

By this time, uchulainn was so covered with wounds that he could not
bear his clothes to touch his skin, but had to hold them off with
hazel-sticks, and fill the spaces in between with grass. There was not a
place on him the size of a needle-point that had not a wound on it,
ecept his left hand, which held the shield.

But Sualtam, uchulainns reputed father, had learned what a sore plight
his son was in. Do I hear the heaven bursting, or the sea running away,
or the earth breaking open, he cried, or is it my sons groaning that
I hear? e came to look for him, and found him covered with wounds and
blood. But uchulainn would not let his father either weep for him or
try to avenge him. o, rather, he said to him, to main Macha, and
tell onchobar that I can no longer defend lster against all the four
provinces of rin without help. Tell him that there is no part of my
body on which there is not a wound, and that, if he wishes to save his
kingdom, he must make no delay.

Sualtam mounted uchulainns war-horse, the ray of Battle, and
galloped to main Macha. Three times he shouted: Men are being killed,
women carried off, and cattle lifted in lster. Twice he met with no
response. The third time, athbad the Druid roused himself from his
lethargy to denounce the man who was disturbing the kings sleep. In his
indignation Sualtam turned away so sharply that the gray steed reared,
and struck its riders shield against his neck with such force that he
was decapitated. The startled horse then turned back into onchobars
stronghold, and dashed through it, Sualtams severed head continuing to
cry out: Men are being killed, women carried off, and cattle lifted in
lster. Such a portent was enough to rouse the most drowsy. onchobar,
himself again, swore a great oath. The heavens are over us, the earth
is beneath us, and the sea circles us round, and, unless the heavens
fall, with all their stars, or the earth gives way beneath us, or the
sea bursts over the land, I will restore every cow to her stable, and
every woman to her home.

e sent messengers to rally lster, and they gathered, and marched on
the men of rin. And then was fought such a battle as had never been
before in Ireland. First one side, then the other, gave way and rallied
again, until uchulainn heard the noise of the fight, and rose up, in
spite of all his wounds, and came to it.

e called out to Fergus, reminding him how he had bound himself with an
oath to run from him when called upon to do so. So Fergus ran before
uchulainn, and when Medbs army saw their leader running they broke and
fled like one man.

But the Brown Bull of ualgne went with the army into onnaught, and
there he met Ailills bull, the White-horned. And he fought the
White-horned, and tore him limb from limb, and carried off pieces of him
on his horns, dropping the loins at Athlone and the liver at Trim. Then
he went back to ualgne, and turned mad, killing all who crossed his
path, until his heart burst with bellowing, and he fell dead.

This was the end of the great war called Tin B huailgn, the
Driving of the attle of ooley.

et, wondrous as it was, it was not the most marvellous of uchulainns
eploits. ike all the solar gods and heroes of eltic myth, he carried
his conquests into the dark region of ades. On this occasion the
mysterious realm is an island called Dn Scaith, that is, the Shadowy
Town, and though its king is not mentioned by name, it seems likely
that he was Mider, and that Dn Scaith is another name for the Isle of
Falga, or Man. The story, as a poem relates it, is curiously
suggestive of a raid which the powers of light, and especially the
sun-gods, are represented as having made upon ades in kindred British
myth. The same loathsome combatants issue out of the underworld to
repel its assailants. There was a pit in the centre of Dn Scaith, out
of which swarmed a vast throng of serpents. No sooner had uchulainn and
the heroes of lster disposed of these than a house full of toads was
loosed upon themsharp, beaked monsters says the poem, which caught
them by the noses, and these were in turn replaced by fierce dragons.
et the heroes prevailed and carried off the spoilthree cows of magic
qualities and a marvellous cauldron in which was always found an
inehaustible supply of meat, with treasure of silver and gold to boot.
They started back for Ireland in a coracle, the three cows being towed
behind, with the treasure in bags around their necks. But the gods of
ades raised a storm which wrecked their ship, and they had to swim
home. ere uchulainns more than mortal prowess came in useful. We are
told that he floated nine men to shore on each of his hands, and thirty
on his head, while eight more, clinging to his sides, used him as a kind
of life-belt.

After this, came the tragedy of uchulainns career, the unhappy duel in
which he killed his only son, not knowing who he was. The story is one
common, apparently, to the Aryan nations, for it is found not only in
the aelic, but in the Teutonic and ersian mythic traditions. It will
be remembered that uchulainn defeated a rival of Scathach the Amazon,
named Aoife, and compelled her to render submission. The hero had also a
son by Aoife, and he asked that the boy should be called onlaoch,
and that, when he was of age to travel, he should be sent to Ireland to
find his father. Aoife promised this, but, a little later, news came to
her that uchulainn had married mer. Mad with ealousy, she determined
to make the son avenge her slight upon the father. She taught him the
craft of arms until there was no more that he could learn, and sent him
to Ireland. Before he started, she laid three geasa upon him. The
first was that he was not to turn back, the second that he was never to
refuse a challenge, and the third that he was never to tell his name.

e arrived at Dundealgan, uchulainns home, and the warrior onall
came down to meet him, and asked him his name and lineage. e refused to
tell them, and this led to a duel, in which onall was disarmed and
humiliated. uchulainn net approached him, asked the same question, and
received the same answer. et if I was not under a command, said
onlaoch, who did not know he was speaking to his father, there is no
man in the world to whom I would sooner tell it than to yourself, for I
love your face. ven this compliment could not stave off the fight, for
uchulainn felt it his duty to punish the insolence of this stripling
who refused to declare who he was. The fight was a fierce one, and the
invincible uchulainn found himself so pressed that the hero-light
shone round him and transfigured his face. When onlaoch saw this, he
knew who his antagonist must be, and purposely flung his spear slantways
that it might not hit his father. But before uchulainn understood, he
had thrown the terrible gae bolg. onlaoch, dying, declared his name;
and so passionate was uchulainns grief that the men of lster were
afraid that in his madness he might wreak his wrath upon them. They,
therefore, called upon athbad the Druid to put him under a glamour.
athbad turned the waves of the sea into the appearance of armed men,
and uchulainn smote them with his sword until he fell prone from
weariness.

It would take too long to relate all the other adventures and eploits
of uchulainn. nough has been done if any reader of this chapter should
be persuaded by it to study the wonderful saga of ancient Ireland for
himself. We must pass on quickly to its tragical closethe heros death.

Medb, ueen of onnaught, had never forgiven him for keeping back her
army from raiding lster, and for slaying so many of her friends and
allies. So she went secretly to all those whose relations uchulainn had
killed and they were many, and stirred them up to revenge.

Besides this, she had sent the three daughters of alatin the Wizard,
born after their fathers death at the hands of uchulainn, to Alba and
to Babylon to learn witchcraft. When they came back they were mistresses
of every kind of sorcery, and could make the illusion of battle with an
incantation.

And, lest she might fail even then, she waited with patience until the
ltonians were again in their magic weakness, and there was no one to
help uchulainn but himself.

ugaid, son of the uroi, ing of Munster whom uchulainn had
killed for the sake of Blathnat, Miders daughter, gathered the Munster
men; rc, whose father had also fallen at uchulainns hands, called the
men of Meath; the ing of einster brought out his army; and, with
Ailill and Medb and all onnaught, they marched into lster again, and
began to ravage it.

onchobar called his warriors and druids into council, to see if they
could find some means of putting off war until they were ready to meet
it. e did not wish uchulainn to go out single-handed a second time
against all the rest of Ireland, for he knew that, if the champion
perished, the prosperity of lster would fall with him for ever. So,
when uchulainn came to main Macha, the king set all the ladies,
singers, and poets of the court to keep his thoughts from war until the
men of lster had recovered from their weakness.

But while they sat feasting and talking in the sunny house, the three
daughters of alatin came fluttering down on to the lawn before it, and
began gathering grass and thistles and puff-balls and withered leaves,
and turning them into the semblance of armies. And, by the same magic,
they caused shouts and shrieks and trumpet-blasts and the clattering of
arms to be heard all round the house, as though a battle were being
fought.

uchulainn leaped up, red with shame to think that fighting should be
going on without his help, and seized his sword. But athbads son
caught him by the arms. All the druids eplained to him that what he saw
was only an enchantment raised by the children of alatin to draw him
out to his death. But it was as much as all of them could do to keep him
quiet while he saw the phantom armies and heard the magic sounds.

So they decided that it would be well to remove uchulainn from main
Macha to lean-na-Bodhar, the Deaf alley, until all the
enchantments of the daughters of alatin were spent. It was the quality
of this valley that, if all the men of Ireland were to shout round it at
once, no one within it would hear a sound.

But the daughters of alatin went there too, and again they took
thistles and puff-balls and withered leaves, and put on them the
appearance of armed men; so that there seemed to be no place outside the
whole valley that was not filled with shouting battalions. And they made
the illusion of fires all around and the sound of women shrieking.
veryone who heard that outcry was frightened at it, not only the men
and women, but even the dogs.

Though the women and the druids shouted back with all the strength of
their voices, to drown it, they could not keep uchulainn from hearing.
Alas! he cried, I hear the men of Ireland shouting as they ravage the
province. My triumph is at an end; my fame is gone; lster lies low for
ever. et it pass, said athbad; it is only the idle magic noises
made by the children of alatin, who want to draw you out, to put an end
to you. Stay here with us, and take no heed of them.

uchulainn obeyed; and the daughters of alatin went on for a long time
filling the air with noises of battle. But they grew tired of it at
last; for they saw that the druids and women had outwitted them.

They did not succeed until one of them took the form of a leman of
uchulainns, and came to him, crying out that Dundealgan was burnt, and
Muirthemne ruined, and the whole province of lster ravaged. Then, at
last, he was deceived, and took his arms and armour, and, in spite of
all that was said to him, he ordered aeg to yoke his chariot.

Signs and portents now began to gather as thickly round the doomed hero
as they did round the wooers in the hall of Odysseus. is famous
war-horse, the ray of Macha, refused to be bridled, and shed large
tears of blood. is mother, Dechtir, brought him a goblet full of wine,
and thrice the wine turned into blood as he put it to his lips. At the
first ford he crossed, he saw a maiden of the sdhe washing clothes
and armour, and she told him that it was the clothes and arms of
uchulainn, who was soon to be dead. e met three ancient hags cooking a
hound on spits of rowan, and they invited him to partake of it. e
refused, for it was taboo to him to eat the flesh of his namesake; but
they shamed him into doing so by telling him that he ate at rich mens
tables and refused the hospitality of the poor. The forbidden meat
paralysed half his body. Then he saw his enemies coming up against him
in their chariots.

uchulainn had three spears, of which it was prophesied that each should
kill a king. Three druids were charged in turn to ask for these spears;
for it was not thought lucky to refuse anything to a druid. The first
one came up to where uchulainn was making the plain red with slaughter.
ive me one of those spears, he said, or I will lampoon you. Take
it, replied uchulainn, I have never yet been lampooned for refusing
anyone a gift. And he threw the spear at the druid, and killed him. But
ugaid, son of uroi, got the spear, and killed aeg with it. aeg was
the king of all chariot-drivers.

ive me one of your spears, uchulainn, said the second druid. I need
it myself, he replied. I will lampoon the province of lster because
of you, if you refuse. I am not obliged to give more than one gift in
a day, said uchulainn, but lster shall never be lampooned because of
me. e threw the spear at the druid, and it went through his head. But
rc, ing of einster, got it, and mortally wounded the ray of Macha,
the king of all horses.

ive me your spear, said the third druid. I have paid all that is due
from myself and lster, replied uchulainn. I will satirize your
kindred if you do not, said the druid. I shall never go home, but I
will be the cause of no lampoons there, answered uchulainn, and he
threw the spear at the asker, and killed him. But ugaid threw it back,
and it went through uchulainns body, and wounded him to the death.

Then, in his agony, he greatly desired to drink. e asked his enemies to
let him go to a lake that lay close by, and quench his thirst, and then
come back again. If I cannot come back to you, come to fetch me, he
said; and they let him go.

uchulainn drank, and bathed, and came out of the water. But he found
that he could not walk; so he called to his enemies to come to him.
There was a pillar-stone near; and he bound himself to it with his belt,
so that he might die standing up, and not lying down. is dying horse,
the ray of Macha, came back to fight for him, and killed fifty men with
his teeth and thirty with each of his hoofs. But the hero-light had
died out of uchulainns face, leaving it as pale as a one-nights
snow, and a crow came and perched upon his shoulder.

Truly it was not upon that pillar that birds used to sit, said rc.

Now that they were certain that uchulainn was dead, they all gathered
round him, and ugaid cut off his head to take it to Medb. But vengeance
came quickly, for onall the ictorious was in pursuit, and he made a
terrible slaughter of uchulainns enemies.

Thus perished the great hero of the aels in the twenty-seventh year of
his age. And with him fell the prosperity of main Macha and of the ed
Branch of lster.

-----

Footnote :

    There came
     Tigernmas, the prince of Tara yonder,
     On alloween with many hosts,
     A cause of grief to them was the deed.

    Dead were the men
     Of Banbas host, without happy strength,
     Around Tigernmas, the destructive man in the North,
     From the worship of romm ruaichtwas no luck for them.

    For I have learnt,
     cept one-fourth of the keen aels
     Not a man alivelasting the snare!
     scaped without death in his mouth.

     Dr. uno Meyers translation of the Dinnsenchus of Mag Slecht.

Footnote :

  Nutt: oyage of Bran, p. .

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe ods in ile.

Footnote :

  ronounced Maive.

Footnote :

  The story of the Tragical Death of ing onchobar, translated by
  ugene Ourry from the Book of einster, will be found in the
  appendi to his MS. Materials of Irish istory, and more
  accessible in Miss ulls uchullin Saga.

Footnote :

  The name is best pronounced hoolin or uchullin ch as in
  erman.

Footnote :

  The descent of the principal ed Branch eroes from the Tuatha D
  Danann is given in a table in Miss ulls Introduction to her
  uchullin Saga.

Footnote :

  onchobar is called a terrestrial god of the ltonians in the Book of
  the Dun ow, and Dechtir is termed a goddess in the Book of einster.

Footnote :

  e is last heard of as chief cook to onair the reat, a mythical
  king of Ireland.

Footnote :

  In the Book of einster.

Footnote :

  For a description of Navan Fort see a paper by M. de ubainville in
  the evue eltique, ol. I.

Footnote :

  uchulainn, the Irish Achilles. By Alfred Nutt. opular Studies in
  Mythology, omance, and Folklore, No. .

Footnote :

  See a series of interesting parallels between uchulainn and eracles
  in Studies in the Arthurian egend, chap. I and .

Footnote :

  The Tin B huailgn. Translated by Standish ayes Orady.

Footnote :

  The Irish romances relating to uchulainn and his cycle, nearly a
  hundred in number, need hardly be referred to severally in this
  chapter. Of many of the tales, too, there eist several
  slightly-varying versions. Many of them have been translated by
  different scholars. The reader desiring a more complete survey of the
  uchulainn legend is referred to Miss ulls uchullin Saga or to
  ady regorys uchulain of Muirthemne.

Footnote :

  ronounced Avair.

Footnote :

  sually identified, however, with the Isle of Skye.

Footnote :

  ronounced efa.

Footnote :

  A literal translation by Miss Winifred Faraday of the Tin Bo
  huailgn from the Book of the Dun ow and the ellow Book of ecan
  has been published by Mr. Nuttrimm ibrary, No. .

Footnote :

  ronounced ooley.

Footnote :

  This prophecy here much abridged is, in the original, in verse.

Footnote :

  Finnavr.

Footnote :

  Bellows-dart, apparently a kind of harpoon. It had thirty barbs.

Footnote :

  It is contained in the Book of the Dun ow story called the hantom
  hariot.

Footnote :

  See chap. The ictories of ight over Darkness.

Footnote :

  ronounced onla.

Footnote :

  A kind of mystic prohibition or taboo; singular, geis.

Footnote :

  Now called Dundalk.

Footnote :

  ronounced ewy.

Footnote :

  ronounced len na Mower.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT III

                        SOM AI O-STOIS


The heroic age of Ireland was not, however, the mere orgy of battle
which one might assume from the previous chapter. It had room for its
elen and its Andromache as well as for its Achilles and its ector. Its
champions could find time to make love as well as war. More than this,
the legends of their courtships often have a romantic beauty found in no
other early literature. The women have free scope of choice, and claim
the respect of their wooers. Indeed, it has been pointed out that the
mythical stories of the elts must have created the chivalrous romances
of medival urope. In them, and in no other previous literature, do we
find such knightly treatment of an enemy as we see in the story of
uchulainn and Ferdiad, or such poetic delicacy towards a woman as is
displayed in the wooing of mer. The talk between man and maid when
uchulainn comes in his chariot to pay his suit to mer at Forgalls
dn might, save for its strangeness, almost have come out of some
quite modern romance.

mer lifted up her lovely face and recognised uchulainn, and she said,
May od make smooth the path before you!

And you, he said, may you be safe from every harm.

She asks him whence he has come, and he tells her. Then he questions her
about herself.

I am a Tara of women, she replies, the whitest of maidens, one who is
gazed at but who gazes not back, a rush too far to be reached, an
untrodden way.... I was brought up in ancient virtues, in lawful
behaviour, in the keeping of chastity, in rank equal to a queen, in
stateliness of form, so that to me is attributed every noble grace among
the hosts of rins women. In more boastful strain uchulainn tells of
his own birth and deeds. Not like the son of a peasant had he been
reared at onchobars court, but among heroes and champions, esters and
druids. When he is weakest his strength is that of twenty; alone he will
fight against forty; a hundred men would feel safe under his protection.
One can imagine mers smile as she listens to these braggings. Truly,
she says, they are goodly feats for a tender boy, but they are not yet
those of chariot-chiefs. ery modern, too, is the way in which she
coyly reminds her wooer that she has an elder sister as yet unwed. But,
when at last he drives her to the point, she answers him with gentle,
but proud decision. Not by words, but by deeds is she to be won. The man
she will marry must have his name mentioned wherever the eploits of
heroes are spoken of.

ven as thou hast commanded, so shall all by me be done, said
uchulainn.

And by me your offer is accepted, it is taken, it is granted, replied
mer.

It seems a pity that, after so fine a wooing, uchulainn could not have
kept faithful to the bride he won. et such is not the way of heroes
whom goddesses as well as mortal women conspire to tempt from their
loyalty. Fand, the wife of Manannn son of r, deserted by the sea-god,
sent her sister iban to uchulainn as an ambassador of love. At first
he refused to visit her, but ordered aeg, his charioteer, to go with
iban to the appy lain to spy out the land. aeg returned
enraptured. If all Ireland were mine, he assured his master, with
supreme rule over its fair inhabitants, I would give it up without
regret to go and live in the place that I have seen.

So uchulainn himself went and stayed a month in the eltic aradise
with Fand, the fairest woman of the Sdhe. eturning to the land of
mortals, he made a tryst with the goddess to meet him again in his own
country by the yew-tree at the head of Bailes strand.

But mer came to hear of it, and went to the meeting-place herself, with
fifty of her maidens, each armed with a knife to kill her rival. There
she found uchulainn, aeg, and Fand.

What has led you, uchulainn, said mer, to shame me before the women
of rin and all honourable people? I came under your shelter, trusting
in your faithfulness, and now you seek a cause of quarrel with me.

But uchulainn, hero-like, could not understand why his wife should not
be content to take her turn with this other womansurely no unworthy
rival, for she was beautiful, and came of the lofty race of gods. We see
mer yield at last, with queenly pathos.

I will not refuse this woman to you, if you long for her, she said,
for I know that everything that is new seems fair, and everything that
is common seems bitter, and everything we have not seems desirable to
us, and everything we have we think little of. And yet, uchulainn, I
was once pleasing to you, and I would wish to be so again.

er grief touched him. By my word, he said, you are pleasing to me,
and will be as long as I live.

Then let me be given up, said Fand. It is better that I should be,
replied mer. No, said Fand; it is I who must be given up in the end.

It is I who will go, though I go with great sorrow. I would rather stay
with uchulainn than live in the sunny home of the gods.

O mer, he is yours, and you are worthy of him! What my hand cannot
have, my heart may yet wish well to.

A sorrowful thing it is to love without return. Better to renounce than
not to receive a love equal to ones own.

It was not well of you, O fair-haired mer, to come to kill Fand in her
misery.

It was while the goddess and the human woman were contending with one
another in self-sacrifice that Manannn, Son of the Sea, heard of Fands
trouble, and was sorry that he had forsaken her. So he came, invisible
to all but her alone. e asked her pardon, and she herself could not
forget that she had once been happy with the horseman of the crested
waves, and still might be happy with him again. The god asked her to
make her choice between them, and, when she went to him, he shook his
mantle between her and uchulainn. It was one of the magic properties of
Manannns mantle that those between whom it was shaken could never meet
again. Then Fand returned with her divine husband to the country of the
immortals; and the druids of main Macha gave uchulainn and mer each a
drink of oblivion, so that uchulainn forgot his love and mer her
ealousy.

The scene of this story takes its name from another, and hardly less
beautiful love-tale. The yew-tree at the head of Bailes strand had
grown out of the grave of Baile of the oneyed Speech, and it bore the
appearance of Bailes love, Ailinn. This aelic omeo and uliet were of
royal birth: Baile was heir to lster, and Ailinn was daughter of the
ing of einsters son. Not by any feud of Montague and apulet were
they parted, however, but by the craft of a ghostly enemy. They had
appointed to meet one another at Dundealgan, and Baile, who arrived
there first, was greeted by a stranger. What news do you bring? asked
Baile. None, replied the stranger, ecept that Ailinn of einster was
setting out to meet her lover, but the men of einster kept her back,
and her heart broke then and there from grief. When Baile heard this,
his own heart broke, and he fell dead on the strand, while the messenger
went on the wings of the wind to the home of Ailinn, who had not yet
started. Whence come you? she asked him. From lster, by the shore of
Dundealgan, where I saw men raising a stone over one who had ust died,
and on the stone I read the name of Baile. e had come to meet some
woman he was in love with, but it was destined that they should never
see one another again in life. At this news Ailinn, too, fell dead, and
was buried; and we are told that an apple-tree grew out of her grave,
the apples of which bore the likeness of the face of Baile, while a
yew-tree sprung from Bailes grave, and took the appearance of Ailinn.
This legend, which is probably a part of the common heritage of the
Aryans, is found in folk-lore over an area which stretches from Ireland
to India. The aelic version has, however, an ending unknown to the
others. The two trees, it relates, were cut down, and made into wands
upon which the poets of lster and of einster cut the songs of the
love-tragedies of their two provinces, in ogam. But even these mute
memorials of Baile and Ailinn were destined not to be divided. After two
hundred years, Art the onely, igh-ing of Ireland, ordered them to
be brought to the hall of Tara, and, as soon as the wands found
themselves under the same roof, they all sprang together, and no force
or skill could part them again. So the king commanded them to be kept,
like any other ewel, in the treasury of Tara.

Neither of these stories, however, has as yet attained the fame of one
now to be retold. To many, no doubt, aelic romance is summed up in
the one word Deirdre. It is the legend of this aelic elen that the
poets of the modern eltic school most love to elaborate, while old men
still tell it round the peat-fires of Ireland and the ighlands. Scholar
and peasant alike combine to preserve a tradition no one knows how many
hundred years old, for it was written down in the twelfth-century Book
of einster as one of the prime stories which every bard was bound to
be able to recite. It takes rank with the Fate of the Sons of Tuirenn,
and with the Fate of the hildren of r, as one of the Three
Sorrowful Stories of rin.

So favourite a tale has naturally been much altered and added to in its
passage down the generations. But its essential story is as follows:

ing onchobar of lster was holding festival in the house of one of his
bards, called Fedlimid, when Fedlimids wife gave birth to a daughter,
concerning whom athbad the Druid uttered a prophecy. e foretold that
the new-born child would grow up to be the most lovely woman the world
had ever seen, but that her beauty would bring death to many heroes, and
much peril and sorrow to lster. On hearing this, the ed Branch
warriors demanded that she should be killed, but onchobar refused, and
gave the infant to a trusted serving-woman, to be hidden in a secret
place in the solitude of the mountains, until she was of an age to be
his own wife.

So Deirdre as athbad named her was taken away to a hut so remote from
the paths of men that none knew of it save onchobar. ere she was
brought up by a nurse, a fosterer, and a teacher, and saw no other
living creatures save the beasts and birds of the hills. Nevertheless,
woman-like, she aspired to be loved.

One day, her fosterer was killing a calf for their food, and its blood
ran out upon the snowy ground, which brought a black raven swooping to
the spot. If there were a man, said Deirdre, who had hair of the
blackness of that raven, skin of the whiteness of the snow, and cheeks
as red as the calfs blood, that is the man whom I would wish to marry
me.

Indeed there is such a man, replied her teacher thoughtlessly.
Naoise, one of the sons of snach, heroes of the same race as
onchobar the ing.

The curious Deirdre prevailed upon her teacher to bring Naoise to speak
with her. When they met she made good use of her time, for she offered
Naoise her love, and begged him to take her away from ing onchobar.

Naoise, bewitched by her beauty, consented. Accompanied by his two
brothers, Ardan and Ainle, and their followers, he fled with Deirdre to
Alba, where they made alliance with one of its kings, and wandered over
the land, living by following the deer, and by helping the king in his
battles.

The revengeful onchobar bided his time. One day, as the heroes of the
ed Branch feasted together at main Macha, he asked them if they had
ever heard of a nobler company than their own. They replied that the
world could not hold such another. et, said the king, we lack our
full tale. The three sons of snach could defend the province of lster
against any other province of Ireland by themselves, and it is a pity
that they should still be eiles, for the sake of any woman in the
world. ladly would I welcome them back!

We ourselves, replied the ltonians, would have counselled this long
ago had we dared, O ing!

Then I will send one of my three best champions to fetch them, said
onchobar. ither onall the ictorious, or uchulainn, the son of
Sualtam, or Fergus, the son of oy; and I will find out which of those
three loves me best.

First he called onall to him secretly.

What would you do, O onall, he asked, if you were sent to fetch the
sons of snach, and they were killed here, in spite of your
safe-conduct?

There is not a man in lster, answered onall, who had hand in it
that would escape his own death from me.

I see that I am not dearest of all men to you, replied onchobar, and,
dismissing onall, he called uchulainn, and put the same question to
him.

By my sworn word, replied uchulainn, if such a thing happened with
your consent, no bribe or blood-fine would I accept in lieu of your own
head, O onchobar.

Truly, said the king, it is not you I will send.

The king then asked Fergus, and he replied that, if the sons of snach
were slain while under his protection, he would revenge the deed upon
anyone who was party to it, save only the king himself.

Then it is you who shall go, said onchobar. Set forth to-morrow, and
rest not by the way, and when you put foot again in Ireland at the Dn
of Borrach, whatever may happen to you yourself, send the sons of snach
forward without delay.

The net morning, Fergus, with his two sons, Illann the Fair and Buinne
the uthless ed, set out for Alba in their galley, and reached och
tive, by whose shores the sons of snach were then living. Naoise,
Ainle, and Ardan were sitting at chess when they heard Ferguss shout.

That is the cry of a man of rin, said Naoise.

Nay, replied Deirdre, who had forebodings of trouble. Do not heed it;
it is only the shout of a man of Alba. But the sons of snach knew
better, and sent Ardan down to the sea-shore, where he found Fergus and
his sons, and gave them greeting, and heard their message, and brought
them back with him.

That night Fergus persuaded the sons of snach to return with him to
main Macha. Deirdre, with her second sight, implored them to remain
in Alba. But the eiles were weary for the sight of their own country,
and did not share their companions fears. As they put out to sea,
Deirdre uttered her beautiful Farewell to Alba, that land she was
never to behold again.

           A lovable land is yon eastern land,
            Alba, with its marvels.
            I would not have come hither out of it,
            ad I not come with Naoise.

           ovable are Dn-fidga and Dn-finn,
            ovable the fortress over them;
            Dear to the heart Inis Draigende,
            And very dear is Dn Suibni.

           aill uan!
            nto which Ainle would wend, alas!
            Short the time seemed to me,
            With Naoise in the region of Alba.

           lenn id!
            Often I slept there under the cliff;
            Fish and venison and the fat of the badger
            Was my portion in lenn id.

           lenn Masin!
            Its garlic was tall, its branches white;
            We slept a rocking sleep,
            Over the grassy estuary of Masin.

           lenn tive!
            Where my first house I raised;
            Beauteous its wood:upon rising
            A cattle-fold for the sun was lenn tive.

                                                   

           lenn D-ad!
            My love to every man who hath it as an heritage!
            Sweet the cuckoos note on bending bough,
            On the peak over lenn D-ad.

           Beloved is Draigen,
            Dear the white sand beneath its waves;
            I would not have come from it, from the ast,
            ad I not come with my beloved.

They crossed the sea, and arrived at the Dn of Borrach, who bade them
welcome to Ireland. Now ing onchobar had sent Borrach a secret
command, that he should offer a feast to Fergus on his landing. Strange
taboos called geasa are laid upon the various heroes of ancient
Ireland in the stories; there are certain things that each one of them
may not do without forfeiting life or honour; and it was a geis upon
Fergus to refuse a feast.

Fergus, we are told, reddened with anger from crown to sole at the
invitation. et he could not avoid the feast. e asked Naoise what he
should do, and Deirdre broke in with: Do what is asked of you if you
prefer to forsake the sons of snach for a feast. et forsaking them is
a good price to pay for it.

Fergus, however, perceived a possible compromise. Though he himself
could not refuse to stop to partake of Borrachs hospitality, he could
send Deirdre and the sons of snach on to main Macha at once, under the
safeguard of his two sons, Illann the Fair and Buinne the uthless ed.
So this was done, albeit to the annoyance of the sons of snach and the
terror of Deirdre. isions came to the sorrowful woman; she saw the
three sons of snach and Illann, the son of Fergus, without their heads;
she saw a cloud of blood always hanging over them. She begged them to
wait in some safe place until Fergus had finished the feast. But Naoise,
Ainle, and Ardan laughed at her fears. They arrived at main Macha, and
onchobar ordered the ed Branch palace to be placed at their
disposal.

In the evening onchobar called evarcham, Deirdres old teacher, to
him. o, he said, to the ed Branch, and see Deirdre, and bring me
back news of her appearance, whether she still keeps her former beauty,
or whether it has left her.

So evarcham came to the ed Branch, and kissed Deirdre and the three
sons of snach, and warned them that onchobar was preparing treachery.
Then she went back to the king, and reported to him that Deirdres hard
life upon the mountains of Alba had ruined her form and face, so that
she was no longer worthy of his regard.

At this, onchobars ealousy was partly allayed, and he began to doubt
whether it would be wise to attack the sons of snach. But later on,
when he had drunk well of wine, he sent a second messenger to see if
what evarcham had reported about Deirdre was truth.

The messenger, this time a man, went and looked in through a window.
Deirdre saw him and pointed him out to Naoise, who flung a chessman at
the peering face, and put out one of its eyes. But the man went back to
onchobar, and told him that, though one of his eyes had been struck
out, he would gladly have stayed looking with the other, so great was
Deirdres loveliness.

Then onchobar, in his wrath, ordered the men of lster to set fire to
the ed Branch ouse and slay all within it ecept Deirdre. They flung
fire-brands upon it, but Buinne the uthless ed came out and quenched
them, and drove the assailants back with slaughter. But onchobar called
to him to parley, and offered him a hundred of land and his friendship
to desert the sons of snach. Buinne was tempted, and fell; but the land
given him turned barren that very night in indignation at being owned by
such a traitor.

The other of Ferguss sons was of different make. e charged out, torch
in hand, and cut down the ltonians, so that they hesitated to come near
the house again. onchobar dared not offer him a bribe. But he armed his
own son, Fiacha, with his own magic weapons, including his shield, the
Moaner, which roared when its owner was in danger, and sent him to
fight Illann.

The duel was a fierce one, and Illann got the better of Fiacha, so that
the son of onchobar had to crouch down beneath his shield, which roared
for help. onall the ictorious heard the roar from far off, and thought
that his king must be in peril. e came to the place, and, without
asking questions, thrust his spear Blue-green through Illann. The
dying son of Fergus eplained the situation to onall, who, by way of
making some amends, at once killed Fiacha as well.

After this, the sons of snach held their fort till dawn against all
onchobars host. But, with day, they saw that they must either escape
or resign themselves to perish. utting Deirdre in their centre,
protected by their shields, they opened the door suddenly and fled out.

They would have broken through and escaped, had not onchobar asked
athbad the Druid to put a spell upon them, promising to spare their
lives. So athbad raised the illusion of a stormy sea before and all
around the sons of snach. Naoise lifted Deirdre upon his shoulder, but
the magic waves rose higher, until they were all obliged to fling away
their weapons and swim.

Then was seen the strange sight of men swimming upon dry land. And,
before the glamour passed away, the sons of snach were seized from
behind, and brought to onchobar.

In spite of his promise to the druid, the king condemned them to death.
None of the men of lster would, however, deal the blow. In the end, a
foreigner from Norway, whose father Naoise had slain, offered to behead
them. ach of the brothers begged to die first, that he might not
witness the deaths of the others. But Naoise ended this noble rivalry by
lending their eecutioner the sword called The etaliator, which had
been given him by Manannn son of r. They knelt down side by side, and
one blow of the sword of the god shore off all their heads.

As for Deirdre, there are varying stories of her death, but most of them
agree that she did not survive the sons of snach many hours. But,
before she died, she made an elegy over them. That it is of a singular
pathos and beauty the few verses which there is space to give will
show.

          ong the day without snachs children!
           It was not mournful to be in their company!
           Sons of a king by whom soourners were entertained,
           Three lions from the ill of the ave.

                                                  

          Three darlings of the women of Britain,
           Three hawks of Slieve ullion,
           Sons of a king whom valour served,
           To whom soldiers used to give homage!

                                                  

          That I should remain after Naoise
           et no one in the world suppose:
           After Ardan and Ainle
           My time would not be long.

          lsters over-king, my first husband,
           I forsook for Naoises love.
           Short my life after them:
           I will perform their funeral game.

          After them I shall not be alive
           Three that would go into every conflict,
           Three who liked to endure hardships,
           Three heroes who refused not combats.

                                                  

          O man, that diggest the tomb
           And puttest my darling from me,
           Make not the grave too narrow:
           I shall be beside the noble ones.

It was a poor triumph for onchobar. Deirdre in all her beauty had
escaped him by death. is own chief followers never forgave it. Fergus,
when he returned from Borrachs feast, and found out what had been done,
gathered his own people, slew onchobars son and many of his warriors,
and fled to lsters bitterest enemies, Ailill and Medb of onnaught.
And athbad the Druid cursed both king and kingdom, praying that none of
onchobars race might ever reign in main Macha again.

So it came to pass. The capital of lster was only kept from ruin by
uchulainns prowess. When he perished, it also fell, and soon became
what it is nowa grassy hill.

-----

Footnote :

  The romance of the Wooing of mer, a fragment of which is contained
  in the Book of the Dun ow, has been translated by Dr. uno Meyer, and
  published by him in the Archological eview, ol. I, . Miss
  ull has included this translation in her uchullin Saga. Another
  version of it from a Bodleian MS., translated by the same scholar,
  will be found in the evue eltique, ol. I.

Footnote :

  This story, known as the Sick-Bed of uchulainn, translated into
  French by M. dArbois de ubainville, will be found in his pope
  eltique en Irlande, the fifth volume of our de ittrature
  eltique. Another translation, into nglish, by ugene Ourry is in
  Atlantis, ols. I and II.

Footnote :

  For the full story of Baile and Ailinn see Dr. uno Meyers
  translation in ol. III of the evue eltique.

Footnote :

  There are not only numerous translations of this romance, but also
  many aelic versions. The oldest of the latter is in the Book of
  einster, while the fullest are in two MSS. in the Advocates ibrary
  at dinburgh. The version followed here is from one of these, the
  so-called lenn Masin MS., translated by Dr. Whitley Stokes, and
  contained in Miss ulls uchullin Saga.

Footnote :

  ronounced Naisi.

Footnote :

  ronounced sna.

Footnote :

  It will be found in full in Miss ulls uchullin Saga. The version
  there given was first translated into French by M. onsinet from the
  Book of einster.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT I

                       FINN AND T FNIANS


The epoch of main Macha is followed in the annals of ancient Ireland by
a succession of monarchs who, though doubtless as mythical as ing
onchobar and his court, seem to grow gradually more human. Their line
lasts for about two centuries, culminating in a dynasty with which
legend has occupied itself more than with its immediate predecessors.
This is the one which began, according to the annalists, in A.D. ,
with the famous onn the undred-Fighter, and, passing down to the
reign of his even more famous grandson, ormac the Magnificent, is
connected with the third aelic cyclethat which relates the eploits of
Finn and the Fenians. All these kings had their dealings with the
national gods. A story contained in a fifteenth-century Irish
manuscript, and called The hampions rophecy, tells how ugh
appeared to onn, enveloped him in a magic mist, led him away to an
enchanted palace, and there prophesied to him the number of his
descendants, the length of their reigns, and the manner of their deaths.
Another tradition relates how onns son, onnla, was wooed by a goddess
and borne away, like the British Arthur, in a boat of glass to the
arthly aradise beyond the sea. et another relates onns own
marriage with Becuma of the Fair Skin, wife of that same abraid of the
uick and on Sword who, in another legend, married iban, the sister of
Fand, uchulainns fairy love. Becuma had been discovered in an intrigue
with aiar, a son of Manannn, and, banished from the and of romise,
crossed the sea that sunders mortals and immortals to offer her hand to
onn. The Irish king wedded her, but evil came of the marriage. She grew
ealous of onns other son, Art, and insisted upon his banishment; but
they agreed to play chess to decide which should go, and Art won. Art,
called the onely because he had lost his brother onnla, was king
after onn, but he is chiefly known to legend as the father of ormac.

Many Irish stories occupy themselves with the fame of ormac, who is
pictured as a great legislatora aelic Solomon. ertain traditions
credit him with having been the first to believe in a purer doctrine
than the eltic polytheism, and even with having attempted to put down
druidism, in revenge for which a druid called Maelcen sent an evil
spirit who placed a salmon-bone crossways in the kings throat, as he
sat at meat, and so compassed his death. Another class of stories,
however, make him an especial favourite with those same heathen deities.
Manannn son of r, was so anious for his friendship that he decoyed
him into fairyland, and gave him a magic branch. It was of silver, and
bore golden apples, and, when it was shaken, it made such sweet music
that the wounded, the sick, and the sorrowful forgot their pains, and
were lulled into deep sleep. ormac kept this treasure all his life;
but, at his death, it returned into the hands of the gods.

ing ormac was a contemporary of Finn mac oul, whom he appointed
head of the Fianna irinn, more generally known as the Fenians.
Around Finn and his men have gathered a cycle of legends which were
equally popular with the aels of both Scotland and Ireland. We read of
their eploits in stories and poems preserved in the earliest Irish
manuscripts, while among the peasantry both of Ireland and of the West
ighlands their names and the stories connected with them are still
current lore. pon some of these floating traditions, as preserved in
folk ballads, Macherson founded his factitious Ossian, and the
collection of them from the lips of living men still affords plenty of
employment to aelic students.

ow far Finn and his followers may have been historical personages it is
impossible to say. The Irish people themselves have always held that the
Fenians were a kind of native militia, and that Finn was their general.
The early historical writers of Ireland supported this view. The
chronicler Tighernach, who died in , believed in him, and the
Annals of the Four Masters, compiled between the years  and 
from older chronicles, while they ignore ing onchobar and his ed
Branch hampions as unworthy of the serious consideration of historians,
treat Finn as a real person whose death took place in  A.D. ven so
great a modern scholar as ugene Ourry declared in the clearest
language that Finn, so far from being a merely imaginary or mythical
character, was an undoubtedly historical personage; and that he
eisted about the time at which his appearance is recorded in the Annals
is as certain as that ulius aesar lived and ruled at the time stated
on the authority of the oman historians.

The opinion of more recent eltic scholars, however, is opposed to this
view. Finns pedigree, preserved in the Book of einster, may seem at
first to give some support to the theory of his real eistence, but, on
more careful eamination of it, his own name and that of his father
equally bewray him. Finn or Fionn, meaning fair, is the name of one of
the mythical ancestors of the aels, while his fathers name,
umhal, signifies the sky, and is the same word as amulus, the
aulish heaven-god identified by the omans with Mars. is followers are
as doubtfully human as himself. One may compare them with uchulainn and
the rest of the heroes of main Macha. Their deeds are not less
marvellous. ike the ltonian warriors, they move, too, on equal terms
with the gods. The Fianna of rin, says a tract called The Dialogue
of the lders, contained in thirteenth and fourteenth century
manuscripts, had not more frequent and free intercourse with the men of
settled habitation than with the Tuatha D Danann. Angus, Mider,
r, Manannn, and Bodb the ed, with their countless sons and
daughters, loom as large in the Fenian, or so-called Ossianic stories
as do the Fenians themselves. They fight for them, or against them; they
marry them, and are given to them in marriage.

A luminous suggestion of rofessor hys also hints that the Fenians
inherited the conduct of that ancient war formerly waged between the
Tuatha D Danann and the Fomors. The most common antagonists of Finn and
his heroes are tribes of invaders from oversea, called in the stories
the ochlannach. These Men of ochlann are usually identified, by
those who look for history in the stories of the Fenian cycle, with the
invading bands of Norsemen who harried the Irish coasts in the ninth
century. But the nucleus of the Fenian tales antedates these
Scandinavian raids, and mortal foes have probably merely stepped into
the place of those immortal enemies of the gods whose ochlann was a
country, not over the seabut under it.

The earlier historians of Ireland were as ready with their dates and
facts regarding the Fenian band as an institution as with the
personality of Finn. It was said to have been first organized by a king
called Fiachadh, in  B.., and abolished, or rather, eterminated, by
airbr, the son of ormac mac Art, in  A.D. We are told that it
consisted of three regiments modelled on the oman legion; each of these
bodies contained, on a peace footing, three thousand men, but in time of
war could be indefinitely strengthened. Its obect was to defend the
coasts of Ireland and the country generally, throwing its weight upon
the side of any prince who happened to be assailed by foreign foes.
During the si months of winter, its members were quartered upon the
population, but during the summer they had to forage for themselves,
which they did by hunting and fishing. Thus they lived in the woods and
on the open moors, hardening themselves for battle by their adventurous
life. The sites of their enormous camp-fires were long pointed out under
the name of the Fenians cooking-places.

It was not easy to become a member of this famous band. A candidate had
to be not only an epert warrior, but a poet and a man of culture as
well. e had practically to renounce his tribe; at any rate he made oath
that he would neither avenge any of his relatives nor be avenged by
them. e put himself under bonds never to refuse hospitality to anyone
who asked, never to turn his back in battle, never to insult any woman,
and not to accept a dowry with his wife. In addition to all this, he had
to pass successfully through the most stringent physical tests. Indeed,
as these have come down to us, magnified by the perfervid eltic
imagination, they are of an altogether marvellous and impossible
character. An aspirant to the Fianna irinn, we are told, had first to
stand up to his knees in a pit dug for him, his only arms being his
shield and a hazel wand, while nine warriors, each with a spear,
standing within the distance of nine ridges of land, all hurled their
weapons at him at once; if he failed to ward them all off, he was
reected. Should he succeed in this first test, he was given the
distance of one tree-lengths start, and chased through a forest by
armed men; if any of them came up to him and wounded him, he could not
belong to the Fenians. If he escaped unhurt, but had unloosed a single
lock of his braided hair, or had broken a single branch in his flight,
or if, at the end of the run, his weapons trembled in his hands, he was
refused. As, besides these tests, he was obliged to ump over a branch
as high as his forehead, and stoop under one as low as his knee, while
running at full speed, and to pluck a thorn out of his heel without
hindrance to his flight, it is clear that even the rank and file of the
Fenians must have been quite eceptional athletes.

But it is time to pass on to a more detailed description of these
champions. They are a goodly company, not less heroic than the
mighty men of lster. First comes Finn himself, not the strongest in
body of the Fenians, but the truest, wisest, and kindest, gentle to
women, generous to men, and trusted by all. If he could help it, he
would never let anyone be in trouble or poverty. If the dead leaves of
the forest had been gold, and the white foam of the water silver, Finn
would have given it all away.

Finn had two sons, Fergus and his more famous brother Ossian.
Fergus of the sweet speech was the Fenians bard, and, also, because of
his honeyed words, their diplomatist and ambassador. et, by the irony
of fate, it is to Ossian, who is not mentioned as a poet in the earliest
tets, that the poems concerning the Fenians which are current in
Scotland under the name of Ossianic Ballads are attributed. Ossians
mother was Sadb, a daughter of Bodb the ed. A rival goddess changed her
into a deerwhich eplains how Ossian got his name, which means fawn.
With such advantages of birth, naturally he was speedy enough to run
down a red deer hind and catch her by the ear, though far less
swift-footed than his cousin aoilte, the Thin Man. Neither was
he so strong as his own son Oscar, the mightiest of all the Fenians,
yet, in his youth, so clumsy that the rest of the band refused to take
him with them on their warlike epeditions. They changed their minds,
however, when, one day, he followed them unawares, found them giving way
before an enemy, and, rushing to their help, armed only with a great log
of wood which lay handy on the ground, turned the fortunes of the fight.
After this, Oscar was hailed the best warrior of all the Fianna; he was
given command of a battalion, and its banner, called the Terrible
Broom, was regarded as the centre of every battle, for it was never
known to retreat a foot. Other prominent Fenians were oll, son of
Morna, at first Finns enemy but afterwards his follower, a man skilled
alike in war and learning. ven though he was one-eyed, we are told that
he was much loved by women, but not so much as Finns cousin, Diarmait
ODuibhne, whose fatal beauty ensnared even Finns betrothed bride,
rainne. Their comic character was onan, who is represented as an
old, bald, vain, irritable man, as great a braggart as ancient istol
and as foul-mouthed as Thersites, and yet, after he had once been shamed
into activity, a true man of his hands. These are the prime Fenian
heroes, the chief actors in its stories.

The Fenian epic begins, before the birth of its hero, with the struggle
of two rival clans, each of whom claimed to be the real and only Fianna
irinn. They were called the lann Morna, of which oll mac Morna was
head, and the lann Baoisgne, commanded by Finns father, umhal. A
battle was fought at nucha, in which oll killed umhal, and the
lann Baoisgne was scattered. umhals wife, however, bore a posthumous
son, who was brought up among the Slieve Bloom Mountains secretly, for
fear his fathers enemies should find and kill him. The boy, who was at
first called Deimne, grew up to be an epert hurler, swimmer,
runner, and hunter. ater, like uchulainn, and indeed many modern
savages, he took a second, more personal name. Those who saw him asked
who was the fair youth. e accepted the omen, and called himself
Deimne Finn.

At length, he wandered to the banks of the Boyne, where he found a
soothsayer called Finn the Seer living beside a deep pool near Slane,
named Fecs ool, in hope of catching one of the salmons of
knowledge, and, by eating it, obtaining universal wisdom. e had been
there seven years without result, though success had been prophesied to
one named Finn. When the wandering son of umhal appeared, Finn the
Seer engaged him as his servant. Shortly afterwards, he caught the
coveted fish, and handed it over to our Finn to cook, warning him to eat
no portion of it. ave you eaten any of it? he asked the boy, as he
brought it up ready boiled. No indeed, replied Finn; but, while I was
cooking it, a blister rose upon the skin, and, laying my thumb down upon
the blister, I scalded it, and so I put it into my mouth to ease the
pain. The man was perpleed. ou told me your name was Deimne, he
said; but have you any other name? es, I am also called Finn. It
is enough, replied his disappointed master. at the salmon yourself,
for you must be the one of whom the prophecy told. Finn ate the salmon
of knowledge, and thereafter he had only to put his thumb under his
tooth, as he had done when he scalded it, to receive fore-knowledge and
magic counsel.

Thus armed, Finn was more than a match for the lann Morna. urious
legends tell how he discovered himself to his fathers old followers,
confounded his enemies with his magic, and turned them into faithful
servants. ven oll of the Blows had to submit to his sway.
radually he welded the two opposing clans into one Fianna, over which
he ruled, taking tribute from the kings of Ireland, warring against the
Fomorian ochlannach, destroying every kind of giant, serpent, or
monster that infested the land, and at last carrying his mythical
conquests over all urope.

Out of the numberless stories of the Fenian eploits it is hard to
choose eamples. All are heroic, romantic, wild, fantastic. In many of
them the Tuatha D Danann play prominent parts. One such story connects
itself with an earlier mythological episode already related. The reader
will remember how, when the Dagda gave up the kingship of the
immortals, five aspirants appeared to claim it; how of these fiveAngus,
Mider, r, Ilbhreach son of Manannn, and Bodb the edthe latter was
chosen; how r refused to acknowledge him, but was reconciled later;
how Mider, equally rebellious, fled to desert country round Mount
einster in ounty arlow; and how a yearly war was waged upon him and
his people by the rest of the gods to bring them to subection. This war
was still raging in the time of Finn, and Mider was not too proud to
seek his help. One day that Finn was hunting in Donegal, with Ossian,
Oscar, aoilte, and Diarmait, their hounds roused a beautiful fawn,
which, although at every moment apparently nearly overtaken, led them in
full chase as far as Mount einster. ere it suddenly disappeared into a
cleft in the hillside. eavy snow, making the forests branches as it
were a withe-twist, now fell, forcing the Fenians to seek for some
shelter, and they therefore eplored the place into which the fawn had
vanished. It led to a splendid sdh in the hollow of the hill.
ntering it, they were greeted by a beautiful goddess-maiden, who told
them that it was she, Miders daughter, who had been the fawn, and that
she had taken that shape purposely to lead them there, in the hope of
getting their help against the army that was coming to attack the
sdh. Finn asked who the assailants would be, and was told that they
were Bodb the ed with his seven sons, Angus Son of the oung with his
seven sons, r of Sdh Fionnechaidh with his twenty-seven sons, and
Fionnbharr of Sdh Meadha with his seventeen sons, as well as numberless
gods of lesser fame drawn from sdhe not only over all Ireland, but
from Scotland and the islands as well. Finn promised his aid, and, with
the twilight of that same day, the attacking forces appeared, and made
their annual assault. They were beaten off, after a battle that lasted
all night, with the loss of ten men, ten score, and ten hundred. Finn,
Oscar, and Diarmait, as well as most of Miders many sons, were sorely
wounded, but the leech abhra healed all their wounds.

Sooth to say, the Fenians did not always require the ecuse of fairy
alliance to start them making war on the race of the hills. One of the
so-called Ossianic ballads is entitled The hase of the nchanted
igs of Angus of the Brugh. This Angus is, of course, the Son of
the oung, and the Brugh that famous sdh beside the Boyne out of
which he cheated his father, the Dagda. After the friendly manner of
gods towards heroes, he invited Finn and a picked thousand of his
followers to a banquet at the Brugh. They came to it in their finest
clothes, goblets went from hand to hand, and waiters were kept in
motion. At last conversation fell upon the comparative merits of the
pleasures of the table and of the chase, Angus stoutly contending that
the gods life of perpetual feasting was better than all the Fenian
huntings, and Finn as stoutly denying it. Finn boasted of his hounds,
and Angus said that the best of them could not kill one of his pigs.
Finn angrily replied that his two hounds, Bran and Sgeolan,
would kill any pig that trod on dry land. Angus answered that he could
show Finn a pig that none of his hounds or huntsmen could catch or kill.
ere were the makings of a pretty quarrel among such inflammable
creatures as gods and heroes, but the steward of the feast interposed
and sent everyone to bed. The net morning, Finn left the Brugh, for he
did not want to fight all Anguss fairies with his handful of a thousand
men. A year passed before he heard more of it; then came a messenger
from Angus, reminding Finn of his promise to pit his men and hounds
against Anguss pigs. The Fenians seated themselves on the tops of the
hills, each with his favourite hound in leash, and they had not been
there long before there appeared on the eastern plain a hundred and one
such pigs as no Fenian had ever seen before. ach was as tall as a deer,
and blacker than a smiths coals, having hair like a thicket and
bristles like ships masts. et such was the prowess of the Fenians that
they killed them all, though each of the pigs slew ten men and many
hounds. Then Angus complained that the Fenians had murdered his son and
many others of the Tuatha D Danann, who, indeed, were none other than
the pigs whose forms they had taken. There were mighty recriminations on
both sides, and, in the end, the enraged Fenians prepared to attack the
Brugh on the Boyne. Then only did Angus begin to yield, and, by the
advice of Ossian, Finn made peace with him and his fairy folk.

Such are specimens of the tales which go to make up the Fenian cycle of
sagas. unting is the most prominent feature of them, for the Fenians
were essentially a race of mighty hunters. But the creatures of their
chase were not always flesh and blood. nchanters who wished the Fenians
ill could always lure them into danger by taking the shape of boar or
deer, and many a story begins with an innocent chase and ends with a
murderous battle. But out of such struggles the Fenians always emerge
successfully, as Ossian is represented proudly boasting, through
truthfulness and the might of their hands.

The most famous chase of all is, however, not that of deer or boar, but
of a woman and a man, Finns betrothed wife and his nephew
Diarmait. ver fortunate in war, the Fenian leader found disaster
in his love. Wishing for a wife in his old age, he sent to seek rainne,
the daughter of ormac, the igh-ing of Ireland. Both ing ormac and
his daughter consented, and Finns ambassadors returned with an
invitation to the suitor to come in a fortnights time to claim his
bride. e arrived with his picked band, and was received in state in the
great banqueting-hall of Tara. There they feasted, and there rainne,
the kings daughter, casting her eyes over the assembled Fenian heroes,
saw Diarmait ODuibhne.

This Fenian Adonis had a beauty-spot upon his cheek which no woman could
see without falling instantly in love with him. rainne, for all her
royal birth, was no eception to this rule. She asked a druid to point
her out the principal guests. The druid told her all their names and
eploits. Then she called for a ewelled drinking-horn, and, filling it
with a drugged wine, sent it round to each in turn, ecept to Diarmait.
None could be so discourteous as to refuse wine from the hand of a
princess. All drank, and fell into deep sleep.

Then, rising, she came to Diarmait, told him her passion for him, and
asked for its return. I will not love the betrothed of my chief, he
replied, and, even if I wished, I dare not. And he praised Finns
virtues, and decried his own fame. But rainne merely answered that she
put him under geasa bonds which no hero could refuse to redeem to
flee with her; and at once went back to her chair before the rest of the
company awoke from their slumber.

After the feast, Diarmait went round to his comrades, one by one, and
told them of rainnes love for him, and of the geasa she had placed
upon him to take her from Tara. e asked each of them what he ought to
do. All answered that no hero could break a geis put upon him by a
woman. e even asked Finn, concealing rainnes name, and Finn gave him
the same counsel as the others. That night, the lovers fled from Tara to
the ford of the Shannon at Athlone, crossed it, and came to a place
called the Wood of the Two Tents, where Diarmait wove a hut of
branches for rainne to shelter in.

Meanwhile Finn had discovered their flight, and his rage knew no bounds.
e sent his trackers, the lann Neamhuain, to follow them. They
tracked them to the wood, and one of them climbed a tree, and, looking
down, saw the hut, with a strong seven-doored fence built round it, and
Diarmait and rainne inside. When the news came to the Fenians, they
were sorry, for their sympathies were with Diarmait and not with Finn.
They tried to warn him, but he took no heed; for he had determined to
fight and not to flee. Indeed, when Finn himself came to the fence, and
called over it to Diarmait, asking if he and rainne were within, he
replied that they were, but that none should enter unless he gave
permission.

So Diarmait, like uchulainn in the war of lster against Ireland, found
himself matched single-handed against a host. But, also like uchulainn,
he had a divine helper. The favourite of the Tuatha D Danann, he had
been the pupil of Manannn son of r in the and of romise, and had
been fostered by Angus of the Brugh. Manannn had given him his two
spears, the ed avelin and the ellow avelin, and his two swords,
the reat Fury and the ittle Fury. And now Angus came to look for
his foster-son, and brought with him the magic mantle of invisibility
used by the gods. e advised Diarmait and rainne to come out wrapped in
the cloak, and thus rendered invisible. Diarmait still refused to flee,
but asked Angus to protect rainne. Wrapping the magic mantle round her,
the god led the princess away unseen by any of the Fenians.

By this time, Finn had posted men outside all the seven doors in the
fence. Diarmait went to each of them in turn. At the first, were Ossian
and Oscar with the lann Baoisgne. They offered him their protection. At
the second, were aoilte and the lann onan, who said they would fight
to the death for him. At the third, were onan and the lann Morna, also
his friends. At the fourth, stood uan with the Fenians of Munster,
Diarmaits native province. At the fifth, were the lster Fenians, who
also promised him protection against Finn. But at the sith, were the
lann Neamhuain, who hated him; and at the seventh, was Finn himself.

It is by your door that I will pass out, O Finn, cried Diarmait. Finn
charged his men to surround Diarmait as he came out, and kill him. But
he leaped the fence, passing clean over their heads, and fled away so
swiftly that they could not follow him. e never halted till he reached
the place to which he knew Angus had taken rainne. The friendly god
left them with a little sage advice: never to hide in a tree with only
one trunk; never to rest in a cave with only one entrance; never to land
on an island with only one channel of approach; not to eat their supper
where they had cooked it, nor to sleep where they had supped, and, where
they had slept once, never to sleep again. With these ed-Indian-like
tactics, it was some time before Finn discovered them.

owever, he found out at last where they were, and sent champions with
venomous hounds to take or kill them. But Diarmait conquered all who
were sent against him.

et still Finn pursued, until Diarmait, as a last hope of escape, took
refuge under a magic quicken-tree, which bore scarlet fruit, the
ambrosia of the gods. It had grown from a single berry dropped by one of
the Tuatha D Danann, who, when they found that they had carelessly
endowed mortals with celestial and immortal food, had sent a huge,
one-eyed Fomor called Sharvan the Surly to guard it, so that no man
might eat of its fruit. All day, this Fomor sat at the foot of the tree,
and, all night, he slept among its branches, and so terrible was his
appearance that neither the Fenians nor any other people dared to come
within several miles of him.

But Diarmait was willing to brave the Fomor in the hope of getting a
safe hiding-place for rainne. e came boldly up to him, and asked leave
to camp and hunt in his neighbourhood. The Fomor told him surlily that
he might camp and hunt where he pleased, so long as he refrained from
taking any of the scarlet berries. So Diarmait built a hut near a
spring; and he and rainne lived there, killing the wild animals for
food.

But, unhappily, rainne conceived so strong a desire to eat the quicken
berries that she felt that she must die unless her wish could be
gratified. At first she tried to hide this longing, but in the end she
was forced to tell her companion. Diarmait had no desire to quarrel with
the Fomor; so he went to him and told the plight that rainne was in,
and asked for a handful of the berries as a gift.

But the Fomor merely answered: I swear to you that if nothing would
save the princess and her unborn child ecept my berries, and if she
were the last woman upon the earth, she should not have any of them.
Whereupon Diarmait fought the Fomor, and, after much trouble, killed
him.

It was reported to Finn that the guardian of the magic quicken-tree
lived no longer, and he guessed that Diarmait must have killed him; so
he came down to the place with seven battalions of the Fenians to look
for him. By this time, Diarmait had abandoned his own hut and taken
possession of that built by the Fomor among the branches of the magic
quicken. e was sitting in it with rainne when Finn and his men came
and camped at the foot of the tree, to wait till the heat of noon had
passed before beginning their search.

To beguile the time, Finn called for his chess-board and challenged his
son Ossian to a game. They played until Ossian had only one more move.

One move would make you a winner, said Finn to him, but I challenge
you and all the Fenians to guess it.

Only Diarmait, who had been looking down through the branches upon the
players, knew the move. e could not resist dropping a berry on to the
board, so deftly that it hit the very chess-man which Ossian ought to
move in order to win. Ossian took the hint, moved it, and won. A second
and a third game were played; and in each case the same thing happened.
Then Finn felt sure that the berries that had prompted Ossian must have
been thrown by Diarmait.

e called out, asking Diarmait if he were there, and the Fenian hero,
who never spoke an untruth, answered that he was. So the quicken-tree
was surrounded by armed men, ust as the fenced hut in the woods had
been. But, again, things happened in the same way; for Angus of the
Brugh took away rainne wrapped in the invisible magic cloak, while
Diarmait, walking to the end of a thick branch, cleared the circle of
Fenians at a bound, and escaped untouched.

This was the end of the famous ursuit; for Angus came as ambassador
to Finn, urging him to become reconciled to the fugitives, and all the
best of the Fenians begged Finn to consent. So Diarmait and rainne were
allowed to return in peace.

But Finn never really forgave, and, soon after, he urged Diarmait to go
out to the chase of the wild boar of Benn ulban. Diarmait killed
the boar without getting any hurt; for, like the reek Achilles, he was
invulnerable, save in his heel alone. Finn, who knew this, told him to
measure out the length of the skin with his bare feet. Diarmait did so.
Then Finn, declaring that he had measured it wrongly, ordered him to
tread it again in the opposite direction. This was against the lie of
the bristles; and one of them pierced Diarmaits heel, and inflicted a
poisoned and mortal wound.

This ursuit of Diarmait and rainne, which has been told at such
length, marks in some degree the clima of the Fenian power, after which
it began to decline towards its end. The friends of Diarmait never
forgave the treachery with which Finn had compassed his death. The
ever-slumbering rivalry between oll and his lann Morna and Finn and
his lann Baoisgne began to show itself as open enmity. uarrels arose,
too, between the Fenians and the igh-ings of Ireland, which culminated
at last in the annihilation of the Fianna at the battle of abhra.

This is said to have been fought in A.D. . Finn himself had perished
a year before it, in a skirmish with rebellious Fenians at the Ford of
Brea on the Boyne. ing ormac the Magnificent, rainnes father, was
also dead. It was between Finns grandson Oscar and ormacs son airbr
that war broke out. This mythical battle was as fiercely waged as that
of Arthurs last fight at amlan. Oscar slew airbr, and was slain by
him. Almost all the Fenians fell, as well as all airbrs forces.

Only two of the greater Fenian figures survived. One was aoilte, whose
swiftness of foot saved him at the end when all was lost. The famous
story, called the Dialogue of the lders, represents him discoursing
to St. atrick, centuries after, of the Fenians wonderful deeds. aving
lost his friends of the heroic age, he is said to have cast in his lot
with the Tuatha D Danann. e fought in a battle, with Ilbhreach son of
Manannn, against r himself, and killed the ancient sea-god with his
own hand. The tale represents him taking possession of rs fairy
palace of Sdh Fionnechaidh, after which we know no more of him, ecept
that he has taken rank in the minds of the Irish peasantry as one of,
and a ruler among, the Sdhe.

The other was Ossian, who did not fight at abhra, for, long before, he
had taken the great ourney which most heroes of mythology take, to that
bourne from which no ordinary mortal ever returns. ike uchulainn, it
was upon the invitation of a goddess that he went. The Fenians were
hunting near ake illarney when a lady of more than human beauty came
to them, and told them that her name was Niamh, daughter of the Son
of the Sea. The aelic poet, Michael omyn, who, in the eighteenth
century, rewove the ancient story into his own words, describes her
in ust the same way as one of the old bards would have done:

          A royal crown was on her head;
           And a brown mantle of precious silk,
           Spangled with stars of red gold,
           overing her shoes down to the grass.

          A gold ring was hanging down
           From each yellow curl of her golden hair;
           er eyes, blue, clear, and cloudless,
           ike a dew-drop on the top of the grass.

          edder were her cheeks than the rose,
           Fairer was her visage than the swan upon the wave,
           And more sweet was the taste of her balsam lips
           Than honey mingled thro red wine.

          A garment, wide, long, and smooth
           overed the white steed,
           There was a comely saddle of red gold,
           And her right hand held a bridle with a golden bit.

          Four shoes well-shaped were under him,
           Of the yellow gold of the purest quality;
           A silver wreath was on the back of his head,
           And there was not in the world a steed better.

Such was Niamh of the olden air, Manannns daughter; and it is small
wonder that, when she chose Ossian from among the sons of men to be her
lover, all Finns supplications could not keep him. e mounted behind
her on her fairy horse, and they rode across the land to the sea-shore,
and then over the tops of the waves. As they went, she described the
country of the gods to him in ust the same terms as Manannn himself
had pictured it to Bran, son of Febal, as Mider had painted it to tain,
and as everyone that went there limned it to those that stayed at home
on earth.

        It is the most delightful country to be found
         Of greatest repute under the sun;
         Trees drooping with fruit and blossom,
         And foliage growing on the tops of boughs.

        Abundant, there, are honey and wine,
         And everything that eye has beheld,
         There will not come decline on thee with lapse of time.
         Death or decay thou wilt not see.

As they went they saw wonders. Fairy palaces with bright sun-bowers and
lime-white walls appeared on the surface of the sea. At one of these
they halted, and Ossian, at Niamhs request, attacked a fierce Fomor who
lived there, and set free a damsel of the Tuatha D Danann whom he kept
imprisoned. e saw a hornless fawn leap from wave to wave, chased by one
of those strange hounds of eltic myth which are pure white, with red
ears. At last they reached the and of the oung, and there Ossian
dwelt with Niamh for three hundred years before he remembered rin and
the Fenians. Then a great wish came upon him to see his own country and
his own people again, and Niamh gave him leave to go, and mounted him
upon a fairy steed for the ourney. One thing alone she made him
swearnot to let his feet touch earthly soil. Ossian promised, and
reached Ireland on the wings of the wind. But, like the children of r
at the end of their penance, he found all changed. e asked for Finn and
the Fenians, and was told that they were the names of people who had
lived long ago, and whose deeds were written of in old books. The Battle
of abhra had been fought, and St. atrick had come to Ireland, and made
all things new. The very forms of men had altered; they seemed dwarfs
compared with the giants of his day. Seeing three hundred of them trying
in vain to raise a marble slab, he rode up to them in contemptuous
kindness, and lifted it with one hand. But, as he did so, the golden
saddle-girth broke with the strain, and he touched the earth with his
feet. The fairy horse vanished, and Ossian rose from the ground, no
longer divinely young and fair and strong, but a blind, gray-haired,
withered old man.

A number of spirited ballads tell how Ossian, stranded in his old
age upon earthly soil, unable to help himself or find his own food, is
taken by St. atrick into his house to be converted. The saint paints to
him in the brightest colours the heaven which may be his own if he will
but repent, and in the darkest the hell in which he tells him his old
comrades now lie in anguish. Ossian replies to the saints arguments,
entreaties, and threats in language which is etraordinarily frank. e
will not believe that heaven could be closed to the Fenians if they
wished to enter it, or that od himself would not be proud to claim
friendship with Finn. And if it be not so, what is the use to him of
eternal life where there is no hunting, or wooing fair women, or
listening to the songs and tales of bards? No, he will go to the
Fenians, whether they sit at the feast or in the fire; and so he dies as
he had lived.

-----

Footnote :

  The translations of Fenian stories are numerous. The reader will find
  many of them popularly retold in ady regorys ods and Fighting
  Men. Thence he may pass on to Mr. Standish ayes Oradys Silva
  adelica; the Waifs and Strays of eltic Tradition, especially ol.
  I; Mr. . . ampbells The Fians; as well as the volumes of the
  evue eltique and the Transactions of the Ossianic Society.

Footnote :

  See Ourrys translation in Appendi III to his MS. Materials.

Footnote :

  The story, found in the Book of the Dun ow, appears in French in De
  ubainvilles pope eltique.

Footnote :

  This famous story is told in several MSS. of the fourteenth and
  fifteenth centuries. For translations see Dr. Whitley Stokes, Irische
  Tete, and Standish ayes Orady, Transactions of the Ossianic
  Society, ol. III.

Footnote :

  In aelic spelling, Fionn mac umhail.

Footnote :

  ronounced Fna.

Footnote :

  Ourry: MS. Materials, ecture I, p. .

Footnote :

  ronounced oul or ooal.

Footnote :

  Agalamh na Senrach. nder the title The olloquy of the Ancients,
  there is an ecellent translation of it, from the Book of ismore, in
  Standish ayes Oradys Silva adelica.

Footnote :

  Orady: Silva adelica.

Footnote :

  ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  See The numeration of Finns ousehold, translated by Orady in
  Silva adelica.

Footnote :

  For a good account, see . . ampbells The Fians, pp. -.

Footnote :

  In more correct spelling, Oisin, and pronounced sheen or
  Isheen.

Footnote :

  ronounced ylta or weeltia.

Footnote :

  ronounced aul.

Footnote :

  ronounced Dermat ODyna.

Footnote :

  ronounced rania.

Footnote :

  ronounced Baskin.

Footnote :

  Now astleknock, near Dublin.

Footnote :

  ronounced Demna.

Footnote :

  This and other boy-eploits of Finn mac umhail are contained in a
  little tract written upon a fragment of the ninth century salter of
  ashel. It is translated in ol. I of the Transactions of the
  Ossianic Society.

Footnote :

  ampbells Fians, p. .

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe ods in ile.

Footnote :

  From the olloquy of the Ancients in Oradys Silva adelica.

Footnote :

  It is translated in ol. I of the Transactions of the Ossianic
  Society.

Footnote :

  ronounced Brn, not Brn.

Footnote :

  ronounced Sklaun or Scolaing.

Footnote :

  A fine translation of the ursuit of Diarmait and rainne has been
  published by S. . Orady in ol. III of the Transactions of the
  Ossianic Society.

Footnote :

  ronounced Navin or Nowin.

Footnote :

  The mountain-ash, or rowan.

Footnote :

  Now called Benbulben. It is near Sligo.

Footnote :

  ronounced avra.

Footnote :

  See Oradys Silva adelica.

Footnote :

  ronounced Nee-av.

Footnote :

  The ay of Oisin in the and of outh, translated by Brian Oooney
  for the Ossianic SocietyTransactions, ol. I. A fine modern poem
  on the same subect is W. B. eats Wanderings of Oisin.

Footnote :

  See the Transactions of the Ossianic Society. They are generally
  called the Dialogues of Oisin and atrick.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               AT 

                    T DIN AND FA OF T ODS


In spite, however, of the wide-spread popularity of the ballads that
took the form of dialogues between Ossian and atrick, certain
traditions say that the saint succeeded in converting the hero. aoilt,
the other great surviving Fenian, was also represented as having gladly
echanged his pagan lore for the faith and salvation offered him. We may
see the same influence on foot in the later legends concerning the ed
Branch hampions. It was the policy of the first hristianizers of
Ireland to describe the loved heroes of their still half-heathen flocks
as having handed in their submission to the new creed. The tales about
onchobar and uchulainn were amended, to prove that those very pagan
personages had been miraculously brought to accept the gospel at the
last. An entirely new story told how the latter hero was raised from the
dead by Saint atrick that he might bear witness of the truth of
hristianity to aogaire the Second, ing of Ireland, which he did with
such fervour and eloquence that the sceptical monarch was
convinced.

Daring attempts were also made to change the Tuatha D Danann from pagan
gods into hristian saints, but these were by no means so profitable as
the policy pursued towards the more human-seeming heroes. With one of
them alone, was success immediate and brilliant. Brigit, the goddess of
fire, poetry, and the hearth, is famous to-day as Saint Bridget, or
Bride. Most popular of all the Irish saints, she can still be easily
recognized as the daughter of the Dagda. er hristian attributes,
almost all connected with fire, attest her pagan origin. She was
born at sunrise; a house in which she dwelt blazed into a flame which
reached to heaven; a pillar of fire rose from her head when she took the
veil; and her breath gave new life to the dead. As with the British
goddess Sul, worshipped at Bath, whothe first century atin writer
Solinus tells usruled over the boiling springs, and at her altar
there flamed a perpetual fire which never whitened into ashes, but
hardened into a stony mass, the sacred flame on her shrine at ildare
was never allowed to go out. It was etinguished once, in the thirteenth
century, but was relighted, and burnt with undying glow until the
suppression of the monasteries by enry the ighth. This sacred fire
might not be breathed on by the impure human breath. For nineteen nights
it was tended by her nuns, but on the twentieth night it was left
untouched, and kept itself alight miraculously. With so little of her
essential character and ritual changed, it is small wonder that the
half-pagan, half-hristian Irish gladly accepted the new saint in the
stead of the old goddess.

Doubtless a careful eamination of Irish hagiology would result in the
discovery of many other saints whose names and attributes might render
them suspect of previous careers as pagan gods. But their acceptation
was not sufficiently general to do away with the need of other means of
counteracting the still living influence of the aelic antheon.
Therefore a fresh school of euhemerists arose to prove that the gods
were never even saints, but merely worldly men who had once lived and
ruled in rin. earned monks worked hard to construct a history of
Ireland from the Flood downwards. Mr. ugene Ourry has compiled from
the various pedigrees they elaborated, and inserted into the books of
Ballymote, ecan, and einster an amazing genealogy which shows how, not
merely the Tuatha D Danann, but also the Fir Bolgs, the Fomors, the
Milesians, and the races of artholon and Nemed were descended from
Noah. aphet, the patriarchs son, was the father of Magog, from whom
came two lines, the first being the Milesians, while the second branched
out into all the other races.

aving once worked the gods, first into universal history, and then into
the history of Ireland, it was an easy matter to supply them with dates
of birth and death, local habitations, and places of burial. We are told
with precision eactly how long Nuada, the Dagda, ugh, and the others
reigned at Tara. The barrows by the Boyne provided them with comfortable
tombs. Their enemies, the Fomors, became real invaders who were beaten
in real battles. Thus it was thought to make plain prose of their
divinities.

It is only fair, however, to these early euhemerists to say that they
have their modern disciples. There are many writers, of recognized
authority upon their subects, who, in dealing with the history of
Ireland or the composition of the British race, claim to find real
peoples in the tribes mentioned in aelic myth. nfortunately, the only
point they agree upon is the accepted onethat the Milesians were
Aryan elts. They are divided upon the question of the Fir Bolgs, in
whom some see the pre-Aryan tribes, while others, led astray by the
name, regard them as Belgic auls; and over the really mythological
races they run wild. In the Tuatha D Danann are variously found aels,
icts, Danes, Scandinavians, igurians, and Finns, while the Fomors rest
under the suspicion of having been Iberians, Moors, omans, Finns,
oths, or Teutons. As for the people of artholon and Nemed, they have
even been eplained as men of the alolithic Age. This chaos of opinion
was fortunately avoided by the native annalists, who had no particular
views upon the question of race, ecept that everybody came from
Spain.

Of course there were dissenters from this prevailing mania for
euhemerization. As late as the tenth century, a poet called ochaid
OFlynn, writing of the Tuatha D Danann, at first seems to hesitate
whether to ascribe humanity or divinity to them, and at last frankly
avows their godhead. In his poem, preserved in the Book of
Ballymote, he says:

        Though they came to learned rinn
         Without buoyant, adventurous ships,
         No man in creation knew
         Whether they were of the earth or of the sky.

        If they were diabolical demons,
         They came from that woeful epulsion;
         If they were of a race of tribes and nations,
         If they were human, they were of the race of Beothach.

Then he enumerates them in due succession, and ends by declaring:

        Though I have treated of these deities in their order,
         et I have not adored them.

One may surmise with probability that the common people agreed rather
with the poet than with the monk. ious men in monasteries might write
what they liked, but mere laymen would not be easily persuaded that
their cherished gods had never been anything more than men like
themselves. robably they said little, but acted in secret according to
their inherited ideas. et it be granted, for the sake of peace, that
oibniu was only a man; none the less, his name was known to be
uncommonly effective in an incantation. This applied equally to
Diancecht, and invocations to both of them are contained in some verses
which an eighth-century Irish monk wrote on the margin of a manuscript
still preserved at St. all, in Switzerland. Some prescriptions of
Diancechts have come down to us, but it must be admitted that they
hardly differ from those current among ordinary medival physicians.
erhaps, after that unfortunate spilling of the herbs that grew out of
Miachs body, he had to fall back upon empirical research. e invented a
porridge for the relief of ailments of the body, as cold, phlegm,
throat cats, and the presence of living things in the body, as worms;
it was compounded of hazel buds, dandelion, chickweed, sorrel, and
oatmeal; and was to be taken every morning and evening. e also
prescribed against the effects of witchcraft and the fourteen diseases
of the stomach.

oibniu, in addition to his original character as the divine smith and
sorcerer, gained a third reputation among the Irish as a great builder
and bridge-maker. As such he is known as the obhan Saer, that is,
oibniu the Architect, and marvellous tales, current all over Ireland
attest his prowess.

           Men calld him obhan Saer, and many a tale
              et lingers in the by-ways of the land
            Of how he cleft the rock, or down the vale
              ed the bright river, child-like, in his hand:
            Of how on giant ships he spread great sail,
              And many marvels else by him first plannd,

writes a poet of modern Ireland. specially were the round towers
attributed to him, and the hristian clerics appropriated his popularity
by describing him as having been the designer of their churches. e
used, according to legend, to wander over the country, clad, like the
reek ephaestus, whom he resembles, in working dress, seeking
commissions and adventures. is works remain in the cathedrals and
churches of Ireland; and, with regard to his adventures, many strange
legends are still, or were until very recently, current upon the lips of
old people in remote parts of Ireland.

Some of these are, as might have been epected, nothing more than
half-understood recollections of the ancient mythology. In them appear
as characters others of the old, yet not quite forgotten godsugh,
Manannn, and Balornames still remembered as those of long-past druids,
heroes, and kings of Ireland in the misty olden time.

One or two of them are worth re-telling. Mr. William arminie,
collecting folk-tales in Achill Island, took one from the lips of an
aged peasant, which tells in its confused way what might almost be
called the central incident of aelic mythology, the mysterious birth of
the sun-god from demoniac parentage, and his eventual slaying of his
grandfather when he came to full age.

obhan the Architect and his son, young obhan, runs the tale, were sent
for by Balor of the Blows to build him a palace. They built it so well
that Balor decided never to let them leave his kingdom alive, for fear
they should build another one equally good for someone else. e
therefore had all the scaffolding removed from round the palace while
they were still on the top, with the intention of leaving them up there
to die of hunger. But, when they discovered this, they began to destroy
the roof, so that Balor was obliged to let them come down.

e, none the less, refused to allow them to return to Ireland. The
crafty obhan, however, had his plan ready. e told Balor that the
inury that had been done to the palace roof could not be repaired
without special tools, which he had left behind him at home. Balor
declined to let either old obhan or young obhan go back to fetch them;
but he offered to send his own son. obhan gave Balors son directions
for the ourney. e was to travel until he came to a house with a stack
of corn at the door. ntering it, he would find a woman with one hand
and a child with one eye.

Balors son found the house, and asked the woman for the tools. She
epected him; for it had been arranged between obhan and his wife what
should be done, if Balor refused to let him return. She took Balors son
to a huge chest, and told him that the tools were at the bottom of it,
so far down that she could not reach them, and that he must get into the
chest, and pick them up himself. But, as soon as he was safely inside,
she shut the lid on him, telling him that he would have to stay there
until his father allowed old obhan and young obhan to come home with
their pay. And she sent the same message to Balor himself.

There was an echange of prisoners, Balor giving the two obhans their
pay and a ship to take them home, and obhans wife releasing Balors
son. But, before the two builders went, Balor asked them whom he should
now employ to repair his palace. Old obhan told him that, net to
himself, there was no workman in Ireland better than one avideen o.

When obhan got back to Ireland, he sent avideen o to Balor. But he
gave him a piece of adviceto accept as pay only one thing: Balors gray
cow, which would fill twenty barrels at one milking. Balor agreed to
this, but, when he gave the cow to avideen o to take back with him to
Ireland, he omitted to include her byre-rope, which was the only thing
that would keep her from returning to her original owner.

The gray cow gave so much trouble to avideen o by her straying, that
he was obliged to hire military champions to watch her during the day
and bring her safely home at night. The bargain made was that avideen
o should forge the champion a sword for his pay, but that, if he lost
the cow, his life was to be forfeited.

At last, a certain warrior called ian was unlucky enough to let the cow
escape. e followed her tracks down to the sea-shore and right to the
edge of the waves, and there he lost them altogether. e was tearing his
hair in his perpleity, when he saw a man rowing a coracle. The man, who
was no other than Manannn son of r, came in close to the shore, and
asked what was the matter.

ian told him.

What would you give to anyone who would take you to the place where the
gray cow is? asked Manannn.

I have nothing to give, replied ian.

All I ask, said Manannn, is half of whatever you gain before you
come back.

ian agreed to that willingly enough, and Manannn told him to get into
the coracle. In the wink of an eye, he had landed him in Balors
kingdom, the realm of the cold, where they roast no meat, but eat their
food raw. ian was not used to this diet, so he lit himself a fire, and
began to cook some food. Balor saw the fire, and came down to it, and he
was so pleased that he appointed ian to be his fire-maker and cook.

Now Balor had a daughter, of whom a druid had prophesied that she would,
some day, bear a son who would kill his grandfather. Therefore, like
Acrisius, in reek legend, he shut her up in a tower, guarded by women,
and allowed her to see no man but himself. One day, ian saw Balor go to
the tower. e waited until he had come back, and then went to eplore.
e had the gift of opening locked doors and shutting them again after
him. When he got inside, he lit a fire, and this novelty so delighted
Balors daughter that she invited him to visit her again. After thisin
the Achill islanders quaint phrasehe was ever coming there, until a
child happened to her. Balors daughter gave the baby to ian to take
away. She also gave him the byre-rope which belonged to the gray cow.

ian was in great danger now, for Balor had found out about the child.
e led the gray cow away with the rope to the sea-shore, and waited for
Manannn. The Son of r had told ian that, when he was in any
difficulty, he was to think of him, and he would at once appear. ian
thought of him now, and, in a moment, Manannn appeared with his
coracle. ian got into the boat, with the baby and the gray cow, ust as
Balor, in hot pursuit, came down to the beach.

Balor, by his incantations, raised a great storm to drown them; but
Manannn, whose druidism was greater, stilled it. Then Balor turned the
sea into fire, to burn them; but Manannn put it out with a stone.

When they were safe back in Ireland, Manannn asked ian for his
promised reward.

I have gained nothing but the boy, and I cannot cut him in two, so I
will give him to you whole, he replied.

That is what I was wanting all the time, said Manannn; when he grows
up, there will be no champion equal to him.

So Manannn baptized the boy, calling him the Dul-Dauna. This name,
meaning Blind-Stubborn, is certainly a curious corruption of the
original Ioldanach Master of all nowledge. When the boy had
grown up, he went one day to the sea-shore. A ship came past, in which
was a man. The traditions of Donnybrook Fair are evidently prehistoric,
for the boy, without troubling to ask who the stranger was, took a dart
out of his pocket, hurled it, and hit him. The man in the boat
happened to be Balor. Thus, in accordance with the prophecy, he was
slain by his grandson, who, though the folktale does not name him, was
obviously ugh.

Another version of the same legend, collected by the Irish scholar
ODonovan on the coast of Donegal, opposite Balor s favourite haunt,
Tory Island, is interesting as completing the one ust narrated. In
this folk-tale, oibniu is called avida, and is made one of three
brothers, the other two being called Mac ineely and Mac Samthainn. They
were chiefs of Donegal, smiths and farmers, while Balor was a robber who
harassed the mainland from his stronghold on Tory Island. The gray cow
belonged to Mac ineely, and Balor stole it. Its owner determined to be
revenged, and, knowing the prediction concerning Balors death at the
hands of an as yet unborn grandson, he persuaded a kindly fairy to
spirit him in female disguise to Tor Mor, where Balors daughter, who
was called thnea, was kept imprisoned. The result of this epedition
was not merely the one son necessary to fulfil the prophecy, but three.
This apparent superfluity was fortunate; for Balor drowned two of them,
the other being picked out of the sea by the same fairy who had been
incidentally responsible for his birth, and handed over to his father,
Mac ineely, to be brought up. Shortly after this, Balor managed to
capture Mac ineely, and, in retaliation for the wrong done him, chopped
off his head upon a large white stone, still known locally as the Stone
of ineely. Satisfied with this, and quite unaware that one of his
daughters children had been saved from death, and was now being brought
up as a smith by avida, Balor went on with his career of robbery,
varying it by visits to the forge to purchase arms. One day, being there
during avidas absence, he began boasting to the young assistant of how
he had compassed Mac ineelys death. e never finished the story, for
ughwhich was the boys namesnatched a red-hot iron from the fire, and
thrust it into Balors eye, and through his head.

Thus, in these two folk-tales, gathered in different parts of
Ireland, at different times, by different persons, survives quite a mass
of mythological detail only to be found otherwise in ancient manuscripts
containing still more ancient matter. rystallized in them may be found
the names of si members of the old aelic antheon, each filling the
same part as of old. oibniu has not lost his mastery of smithcraft;
Balor is still the Fomorian king of the cold regions of the sea; his
daughter thniu becomes, by ian, the mother of the sun-god; ugh, who
still bears his old title of Ioldanach, though it is strangely
corrupted into a name meaning almost the eact opposite, is still
fostered by Manannn, Son of the Sea, and in the end grows up to destroy
his grandfather by a blow in the one vulnerable place, his death-dealing
eye. erhaps, too, we may claim to see a genuine, though umbled
tradition, in the Fomor-like deformities of obhans wife and child, and
in the story of the gray cow and her byre-rope, which recalls that of
the Dagdas black-maned heifer, Ocean.

The memories of the peasantry still hold many stories of ugh, as well
as of Angus, and others of the old gods. But, net to the obhan Saer,
the one whose fame is still greatest is that ever-potent and
ever-popular figure, the great Manannn.

The last, perhaps, to receive open adoration, he is represented by
kindly tradition as having been still content to help and watch over the
people who had reected and ceased to worship him. p to the time of St.
olumba, he was the special guardian of Irishmen in foreign parts,
assisting them in their dangers and bringing them home safe. For the
peasantry, too, he caused favourable weather and good crops. is fairy
subects tilled the ground while men slept. But this is said to have
come to an end at last. Saint olumba, having broken his golden chalice,
gave it to a servant to get repaired. On his way, the servant was met by
a stranger, who asked him where he was going. The man told him, and
showed him the chalice. The stranger breathed upon it, and, at once, the
broken parts reunited. Then he begged him to return to his master, give
him the chalice, and tell him that Manannn son of r, who had mended
it, desired to know in very truth whether he would ever attain paradise.
Alas, said the ungrateful saint, there is no forgiveness for a man
who does such works as this! The servant went back with the answer, and
Manannn, when he heard it, broke out into indignant lament. Woe is me,
Manannn mac r! for years Ive helped the atholics of Ireland, but
Ill do it no more, till theyre as weak as water. Ill go to the gray
waves in the ighlands of Scotland.

And there he remained. For, unless the charming stories of Miss Fiona
Macleod are mere beautiful imaginings and nothing more, he is not
unknown even to-day among the solitary shepherds and fishers of the
farthest ebrides. In the ontemporary eview for October, ,
she tells how an old man of fourscore years would often be visited in
his shieling by a tall, beautiful stranger, with a crest on his head,
like white canna blowing in the wind, but with a blueness in it, and
a bright, cold, curling flame under the soles of his feet. The man
told him many things, and prophesied to him the time of his death.
enerally, the strangers hands were hidden in the folds of the white
cloak he wore, but, once, he moved to touch the shepherd, who saw then
that his flesh was like water, with sea-weed floating among the bones.
So that Murdo MacIan knew that he could be speaking with none other than
the Son of the Sea.

Nor is he yet quite forgotten in his own Island of Man, of which local
tradition says he was the first inhabitant. e is also described as its
king, who kept it from invasion by his magic. e would cause mists to
rise at any moment and conceal the island, and by the same glamour he
could make one man seem like a hundred, and little chips of wood which
he threw into the water to appear like ships of war. It is no wonder
that he held his kingdom against all-comers, until his sway was ended,
like that of the other aelic gods, by the arrival of Saint atrick.
After this, he seems to have declined into a traditionary giant who used
to leap from eel astle to ontrary ead for eercise, or hurl huge
rocks, upon which the mark of his hand can still be seen. It is said
that he took no tribute from his subects, or worshippers ecept bundles
of green rushes, which were placed every Midsummer ve upon two mountain
peaks, one called Warrefield in olden days, but now South Barrule, and
the other called Man, and not now to be identified. is grave, which is
thirty yards long, is pointed out, close to eel astle. The most
curious legend connected with him, however, tells us that he had three
legs, on which he used to travel at a great pace. ow this was done may
be seen from the arms of the island, on which are pictured his three
limbs, oined together, and spread out like the spokes of a wheel.

An Irish tradition tells us that, when Manannn left Ireland for
Scotland, the vacant kingship of the gods or fairies was taken by one
Mac Moineanta, to the great grief of those who had known Manannn.
erhaps this great grief led to Mac Moineantas being deposed, for the
present king of the Irish fairies is Finvarra, the same Fionnbharr to
whom the Dagda allotted the sdh of Meadha after the conquest of the
Tuatha D Danann by the Milesians, and who takes a prominent part in the
Fenian stories. So great is the persistence of tradition in Ireland that
this hill of Meadha, now spelt nockma, is still considered to be the
abode of him and his queen, Onagh. Numberless stories are told about
Finvarra, including, of course, that very favourite eltic tale of the
stolen bride, and her recapture from the fairies by the siege and
digging up of the sdh in which she was held prisoner. Finvarra, like
Mider of Bri eith, carried away a human tainthe wife, not of a high
king, but of an Irish lord. The modern ochaid Airem, having heard an
invisible voice tell him where he was to look for his lost bride,
gathered all his workmen and labourers and proceeded to demolish
nockma. very day they almost dug it up, but every night the breach was
found to have been repaired by fairy workmen of Finvarras. This went on
for three days, when the Irish lord thought of the well-known device of
sanctifying the work of ecavation by sprinkling the turned-up earth
with salt. Needless to say, it succeeded. Finvarra gave back the bride,
still in the trance into which he had thrown her; and the deep cut into
the fairy hill still remains to furnish proof to the incredulous.

Finvarra does not always appear, however, in such unfriendly guise. e
was popularly reputed to have under his special care the family of the
irwans of astle acket, on the northern slope of nockma. Owing to his
benevolent influence, the castle cellars never went dry, nor did the
quality of the wine deteriorate. Besides the wine-cellar, Finvarra
looked after the stables, and it was owing to the eercise that he and
his fairy followers gave the horses by night that Mr. ohn irwans
racers were so often successful on the urragh. That such stories could
have passed current as fact, which they undoubtedly did, is ecellent
proof of how late and how completely a mythology may survive among the
uncultured.

Finvarra rules to-day over a wide realm of fairy folk. Many of these,
again, have their own vassal chieftains, forming a tribal hierarchy such
as must have eisted in the eltic days of Ireland. Finvarra and Onagh
are high king and queen, but, under them, liodna is tributary
queen of Munster, and rules from a sdh near Mallow in ounty ork,
while, under her again, are Aoibhinn, queen of the fairies of North
Munster, and Ain, queen of the fairies of South Munster. These names
form but a single instance. A map of fairy Ireland could without much
difficulty be drawn, showing, with almost political eactness, the
various kingdoms of the Sdhe.

Far less easy, however, would be the task of ascertaining the origin and
lineage of these fabled beings. Some of them can still be traced as
older gods and goddesses. In the eastern parts of Ireland, Badb and her
sisters have become banshees who wail over deaths not necessarily
found in battle. Aynia, deemed the most powerful fairy in lster, and
Ain, queen of South Munster, are perhaps the same person, the
mysterious and awful goddess once adored as Anu, or Danu. Of the two, it
is Ain who especially seems to carry on the traditions of the older
Anu, worshipped, according to the hoice of Names, in Munster as a
goddess of prosperity and abundance. Within living memory, she was
propitiated by a magical ritual upon every Saint ohns ve, to ensure
fertility during the coming year. The villagers round her sdh of noc
Ain nockainy carried burning bunches of hay or straw upon poles to
the top of the hill, and thence dispersed among the fields, waving these
torches over the crops and cattle. This fairy, or goddess was held to be
friendly, and, indeed, more than friendly, to men. Whether or not she
were the mother of the gods, she is claimed as first ancestress by half
a dozen famous Irish families.

Among her children was the famous arl erald, offspring of her alliance
with the fourth arl of Desmond, known as The Magician. As in the
well-known story of the Swan-maidens, the magician-earl is said to have
stolen Ains cloak while she was bathing, and refused to return it
unless she became his bride. But, in the end, he lost her. Ain had
warned her husband never to show surprise at anything done by their son;
but a wonderful feat which he performed made the earl break this
condition, and Ain was obliged, by fairy law, to leave him. But, though
she had lost her husband, she was not separated from her son, who was
received into the fairy world after his death, and now lives under the
surface of ough ur, in ounty imerick, waiting, like the British
Arthur, for the hour to strike in which he shall lead forth his warriors
to drive the foreigners from Ireland. But this will not be until, by
riding round the lake once in every seventh year, he shall have worn his
horses silver shoes as thin as a cats ear.

Not only the tribe of Danu, but heroes of the other mythical cycles
swell the fairy host to-day. Donn, son of Mil, who was drowned before
ever he set foot on Irish soil, lives at Donns ouse, a line of
sand-hills in the Dingle eninsula of erry, and, as late as the
eighteenth century, we find him invoked by a local poet, half in est,
no doubt, but still, perhaps also a little in earnest. The heroes
of lster have no part in fairyland; but their enemy, Medb, is credited
with queenly rule among the Sdhe, and is held by some to have been the
original of ueen Mab. aoilt, last of the Fenians, was, in spite of
his leanings towards hristianity, enrolled among the Tuatha D Danann,
but none of his kin are known there, neither Ossian, nor Oscar, nor even
Finn himself. et not even to merely historical mortals are the gates of
the gods necessarily closed. The Barry, chief of the barony of
Barrymore, is said to inhabit an enchanted palace in nockthierna, one
of the Nagles ills. The not less traditionally famous ODonaghue, whose
domain was near illarney, now dwells beneath the waters of that lake,
and may still be seen, it is said, upon May Day.

But besides these figures, which can be traced in mythology or history,
and others who, though all written record of them has perished, are
obviously of the same character, there are numerous beings who suggest a
different origin from that of the Aryan-seeming fairies. They correspond
to the elves and trolls of Scandinavian, or the silenoi and satyrs of
reek myth. Such is the eprechaun, who makes shoes for the fairies, and
knows where hidden treasures are; the an eanach, or love-talker, who
fills the ears of idle girls with pleasant fancies when, to merely
mortal ideas, they should be busy with their work; the ooka, who leads
travellers astray, or, taking the shape of an ass or mule, beguiles them
to mount upon his back to their discomfiture; the Dulachan, who rides
without a head; and other friendly or malicious sprites. Whence come
they? A possible answer suggests itself. receding the Aryans, and
surviving the Aryan conquest all over urope, was a large non-Aryan
population, which must have had its own gods, who would retain their
worship, be revered by successive generations, and remain rooted to the
soil. May not these uncouth and half-developed Irish eprechauns,
ookas, and Dulachans, together with the Scotch luricanes, Brownies,
and their kin, be no creations of popular fancy, but the dwindling
figures of those darker gods of the dark Iberians?

-----

Footnote :

  The story, contained in the Book of the Dun ow, is called The
  hantom hariot. It has been translated by Mr. OBeirne rowe, and is
  included in Miss ulls uchulinn Saga.

Footnote :

  See lton, Origins of nglish istory, pp. -.

Footnote :

  aius ulius Solinus, known as olyhistor, chap. I.

Footnote :

  It is appended to his translation of the tale of the ile of the
  hildren of snach in Atlantis, ol. III.

Footnote :

  See usacks istory of Ireland, pp. -.

Footnote :

  I.e. from eaven.

Footnote :

  Thomas DArcy Mee: oems, p. , The obhan Saer.

Footnote :

  arminie: West Irish Folk-Tales, pp. -.

Footnote :

  ronounced Ildna.

Footnote :

  It is told in hyss ibbert ectures, pp. -.

Footnote :

  For still other folk-tale versions of this same myth see urtins
  ero Tales of Ireland.

Footnote :

  A Donegal story, collected by Mr. David Fitzgerald and published in
  the evue eltique, ol. I, p. .

Footnote :

  The paper is called Sea-Magic and unning Water.

Footnote :

  Moore: Folklore of the Isle of Man.

Footnote :

  See an article in the Dublin niversity Magazine for une, 

Footnote :

  The story is among those told by ady Wilde in her Ancient egends of
  Ireland, ol. I, pp. -.

Footnote :

  Dublin niversity Magazine, une, .

Footnote :

  ronounced leena.

Footnote :

  ronounced vin.

Footnote :

  See Fitzgerald, opular Tales of Ireland, in ol. I of the evue
  eltique.

Footnote :

  Dublin niversity Magazine, une, .

Footnote :

  For stories of these two Norman-Irish heroes, see rofton rokers
  Fairy egends and Traditions of the South of Ireland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       T BITIS ODS AND TI
                                STOIS

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT I

                        T ODS OF T BITONS


The descriptions and the stories of the British gods have hardly come
down to us in so ample or so compact a form as those of the deities of
the aels, as they are preserved in the Irish and Scottish manuscripts.
They have also suffered far more from the sophistications of the
euhemerist. Only in the Four Branches of the Mabinogi do the gods of
the Britons appear in anything like their real character of supernatural
beings, masters of magic, and untrammelled by the limitations which
hedge in mortals. Apart from those four fragments of mythology, and from
a very few scattered references in the early Welsh poems, one must
search for them under strange disguises. Some masquerade as kings in
eoffrey of Monmouths more than apocryphal istoria Britonum. Others
have received an undeserved canonization, which must be stripped from
them before they can be seen in their true colours. Others, again, were
adopted by the Norman-French romancers, and turned into the champions of
chivalry now known as Arthurs nights of the ound Table. But, however
disguised, their real nature can still be discerned. The aels and the
Britons were but two branches of one racethe eltic. In many of the
gods of the Britons we shall recognize, with names alike and attributes
the same, the familiar features of the aelic Tuatha D Danann.

The British gods are sometimes described as divided into three
familiesthe hildren of Dn, the hildren of Nudd, and the
hildren of lyr. But these three families are really only two; for
Nudd, or ludd, as he is variously called, is himself described as a son
of Beli, who was the husband of the goddess Dn. There can be no doubt
that Dn herself is the same divine personage as Danu, the mother of the
Tuatha D Danann, and that Beli is the British equivalent of the aelic
Bil, the universal Dis ater who sent out the first aels from ades to
take possession of Ireland. With the other family, the hildren of
lyr, we are equally on familiar ground; for the British lyr can be
none other than the aelic sea-god r. These two families or tribes are
usually regarded as in opposition, and their struggles seem to symbolize
in British myth that same conflict between the powers of heaven, light,
and life and of the sea, darkness, and death which are shadowed in
aelic mythology in the battles between the Tuatha D Danann and the
Fomors.

For the children of Dn were certainly gods of the sky. Their names are
writ large in heaven. The glittering W which we call assiopeias
hair was to our British ancestors lys Dn, or Dns ourt; our
Northern rown was aer Arianrod, the astle of Arianrod, Dns
daughter; while the Milky Way was the astle of wydion, Dns
son. More than this, the greatest of her children, the Nudd or
ludd whom some make the head of a dynasty of his own, was the eus
alike of the Britons and of the aels. is epithet of law reint,
that is, of the and of Silver, proves him the same personage as Nuada
the Silver-anded. The legend which must have eisted to eplain this
peculiarity has been lost on British ground, but it was doubtless the
same as that told of the Irish god. With it, and, no doubt, much else,
has disappeared any direct account of battles fought by him as sky-god
against Fomor-like enemies. But, under the faint disguise of a king of
Britain, an ancient Welsh tale records how he put an end to three
supernatural plagues which oppressed his country. In addition to this,
we find him under his name of Nudd described in a Welsh Triad as one of
the three generous heroes of the Isle of Britain, while another makes
him the owner of twenty-one thousand milch cowsan epression which
must, to the primitive mind, have implied inehaustible wealth. Both
help us to the conception of a god of heaven and battle, triumphant, and
therefore rich and liberal.

More tangible evidence is, however, not lacking to prove the wide-spread
nature of his worship. A temple dedicated to him in oman times under
the name of Nodens, or Nudens, has been discovered at ydney, on the
banks of the Severn. The god is pictured on a plaque of bronze as a
youthful deity, haloed like the sun, and driving a four-horsed chariot.
Flying spirits, typifying the winds, accompany him; while his power over
the sea is symbolized by attendant Tritons. This was in the west of
Britain, while, in the east, there is good reason to believe that he had
a shrine overlooking the Thames. Tradition declares that St. auls
athedral occupies the site of an ancient pagan temple; while the spot
on which it stands was called, we know from eoffrey of Monmouth, arth
ludd by the Britons, and udes eat by the Saons.

reat, however, as he probably was, ludd, or Nudd occupies less space
in Welsh story, as we have it now, than his son. wyn ap Nudd has
outlived in tradition almost all his supernatural kin. rofessor hys is
tempted to see in him the British equivalent of the aelic Finn mac
umhail. The name of both alike means white; both are sons of the
heaven-god; both are famed as hunters. wyn, however, is more than that;
for his game is man. In the early Welsh poems, he is a god of battle and
of the dead, and, as such, fills the part of a psychopompos,
conducting the slain into ades, and there ruling over them. In later,
semi-hristianized story he is described as wyn, son of Nudd, whom od
has placed over the brood of devils in Annwn, lest they should destroy
the present race. ater again, as paganism still further
degenerated, he came to be considered as king of the Tylwyth Teg, the
Welsh fairies, and his name as such has hardly yet died out of his
last haunt, the romantic vale of Neath. e is the wild huntsman of Wales
and the West of ngland, and it is his pack which is sometimes heard at
chase in waste places by night.

In his earliest guise, as a god of war and death, he is the subect of a
poem in dialogue contained in the Black Book of aermarthen.
Obscure, like most of the ancient Welsh poems, it is yet a spirited
production, and may be quoted here as a favourable specimen of the
poetry of the early ymri. In it we shall see mirrored perhaps the
clearest figure of the British antheon, the mighty hunter, not of
deer, but of mens souls, riding his demon horse, and cheering on his
demon hound to the fearful chase. e knows when and where all the great
warriors fell, for he gathered their souls upon the field of battle, and
now rules over them in ades, or upon some misty mountain-top. It
describes a mythical prince, named wyddneu aranhir, known to Welsh
legend as the ruler of a lost country now covered by the waters of
ardigan Bay, asking protection of the god, who accords it, and then
relates the story of his eploits:

                    wyddneu.

    A bull of conflict was he, active in dispersing an arrayed army,
    The ruler of hosts, indisposed to anger,
    Blameless and pure his conduct in protecting life.

                      wyn.

    Against a hero stout was his advance,
    The ruler of hosts, disposer of wrath,
    There will be protection for thee since thou askest it.

                    wyddneu.

    For thou hast given me protection
    ow warmly wert thou welcomed!
    The hero of hosts, from what region thou comest?

                      wyn.

    I come from battle and conflict
    With a shield in my hand;
    Broken is the helmet by the pushing of spears.

                    wyddneu.

    I will address thee, ealted man,
    With his shield in distress.
    Brave man, what is thy descent?

                      wyn.

    ound-hoofed is my horse, the torment of battle,
    Fairy am I called, wyn the son of Nudd,
    The lover of reurdilad, the daughter of ludd.

                    wyddneu.

    Since it is thou, wyn, an upright man,
    From thee there is no concealing:
    I am wyddneu aranhir.

                      wyn.

    asten to my ridge, the Taw abode;
    Not the nearest Taw name I to thee,
    But that Taw which is the farthest.

    olished is my ring, golden my saddle and bright:
    To my sadness
    I saw a conflict before aer andwy.

    Before aer andwy a host I saw,
    Shields were shattered and ribs broken;
    enowned and splendid was he who made the assault.

                    wyddneu.

    wyn, son of Nudd, the hope of armies,
    uicker would legions fall before the hoofs
    Of thy horse than broken rushes to the ground.

                      wyn.

    andsome my dog, and round-bodied,
    And truly the best of dogs;
    Dormarth was he, which belonged to Maelgwyn.

                    wyddneu.

    Dormarth with the ruddy nose! what a gazer
    Thou art upon me because I notice
    Thy wanderings on wibir ynyd.

                      wyn.

    I have been in the place where was killed wendoleu,
    The son of eidaw, the pillar of songs,
    When the ravens screamed over blood.

    I have been in the place where Brn was killed,
    The son of Iweridd, of far etending fame,
    When the ravens of the battle-field screamed.

    I have been where lacheu was slain,
    The son of Arthur, etolled in songs,
    When the ravens screamed over blood.

    I have been where Meurig was killed,
    The son of arreian, of honourable fame,
    When the ravens screamed over flesh.

    I have been where wallawg was killed,
    The son of oholeth, the accomplished,
    The resister of loegyr, the son of leynawg.

    I have been where the soldiers of Britain were slain,
    From the east to the north:
    I am the escort of the grave.

    I have been where the soldiers of Britain were slain,
    From the east to the south:
    I am alive, they in death!

A line in this poem allows us to see wyn in another and less sinister
rle. The lover of reurdilad, the daughter of ludd, he calls
himself; and an episode in the mythical romance of ulhwch and Olwen,
preserved in the ed Book of ergest, gives the details of his
courtship. wyn had as rival a deity called wyrthur ap reidawl, that
is ictor, son of Scorcher. These two waged perpetual war for
reurdilad, or reudylad, each in turn stealing her from the other,
until the matter was referred to Arthur, who decided that reudylad
should be sent back to her father, and that wyn and wyrthur should
fight for her every first of May, from henceforth until the day of doom,
and that whichever of them should then be conqueror should have the
maiden. What satisfaction this would be to the survivor of what might
be somewhat flippantly described as, in two senses, the longest
engagement on record, is not very clear; but its mythological
interpretation appears fairly obvious. In wyn, god of death and the
underworld, and in the solar deity, wyrthur, we may see the powers of
darkness and sunshine, of winter and summer, in contest, each
alternately winning and losing a bride who would seem to represent the
spring with its grain and flowers. reudylad, whom the story of ulhwch
and Olwen calls the most splendid maiden in the three islands of the
mighty and in the three islands adacent, is, in fact, the British
ersephon. As the daughter of ludd, she is child of the shining sky.
But a different tradition must have made her a daughter of lyr, the
sea-god; for her name as such passed, through eoffrey of Monmouth, to
Shakespeare, in whose hands she became that pathetic figure, ordelia in
ing ear. It may not be altogether unworthy of notice, though perhaps
it is only a coincidence, that in some myths the reek ersephon is
made a daughter of eus and in others of oseidon.

Turning from the sky-god and his son, we find others of Dns children
to have been the eponents of those arts of life which early races held
to have been taught directly by the gods to men. Dn herself had a
brother, Mth, son of a mysterious Mthonwy, and recognizable as a
benevolent ruler of the underworld akin to Beli, or perhaps that god
himself under another title, for the name Mth, which means coin,
money, treasure, recalls that of louton, the reek god of ades,
in his guise of possessor and giver of metals. It was a belief common to
the Aryan races that wisdom, as well as wealth, came originally from the
underworld; and we find Mth represented, in the Mabinogi bearing his
name, as handing on his magical lore to his nephew and pupil wydion,
who, there is good reason to believe, was the same divine personage whom
the Teutonic tribes worshipped as Woden and Odin. Thus equipped,
wydion son of Dn became the druid of the gods, the master of illusion
and phantasy, and, not only that, but the teacher of all that is useful
and good, the friend and helper of mankind, and the perpetual fighter
against niggardly underworld powers for the good gifts which they
refused to allow out of their keeping. Shoulder to shoulder with him in
this holy war of culture against ignorance, and light against
darkness, stood his brothers Amaethon, god of agriculture, and ovannan,
a god of smithcraft identical with the aelic iobniu. e had also a
sister called Arianrod, or Silver ircle, who, as is common in
mythologies, was not only his sister, but also his wife. So eus wedded
er; and, indeed, it is difficult to say where otherwise the partners
of gods are to come from. Of this connection two sons were born at one
birthDylan and leu, who are considered as representing the twin powers
of darkness and light. With darkness the sea was inseparably connected
by the elts, and, as soon as the dark twin was born and named, he
plunged headlong into his native element. And immediately when he was
in the sea, says the Mabinogi of Mth, son of Mthonwy, he took its
nature, and swam as well as the best fish that was therein. And for that
reason was he called Dylan, the Son of the Wave. Beneath him no wave
ever broke. e was killed with a spear at last by his uncle, ovannan,
and, according to the bard Taliesin, the waves of Britain, Ireland,
Scotland, and the Isle of Man wept for him. Beautiful legends grew
up around his death. The clamour of the waves dashing upon the beach is
the epression of their longing to avenge their son. The sound of the
sea rushing up the mouth of the iver onway is still known as Dylans
death-groan. A small promontory on the arnarvonshire side of the
Menai Straits, called wynt Maen Tylen, or wynt Maen Dulan,
preserves his name.

The other child of wydion and Arianrod grew up to become the British
sun-god, leu law yffes, the eact counterpart of the aelic ugh
amhfada, ight the ong-handed. ike all solar deities, his growth
was rapid. When he was a year old, he seemed to be two years; at the age
of two, he travelled by himself; and when he was four years old, he was
as tall as a boy of eight, and was his fathers constant companion.

One day, wydion took him to the castle of Arianrodnot her castle in
the sky, but her abode on earth, the still-remembered site of which is
marked by a patch of rocks in the Menai Straits, accessible without a
boat only during the lowest spring and autumn tides. Arianrod had
disowned her son, and did not recognize him when she saw him with
wydion. She asked who he was, and was much displeased when told. She
demanded to know his name, and, when wydion replied that he had as yet
received none, she laid a destiny upon him, after the fashion of the
elts, that he should be without a name until she chose to bestow one on
him herself.

To be without a name was a very serious thing to the ancient Britons,
who seem to have held the primitive theory that the name and the soul
are the same. So wydion cast about to think by what craft he might
etort from Arianrod some remark from which he could name their son. The
net day, he went down to the sea-shore with the boy, both of them
disguised as cordwainers. e made a boat out of sea-weed by magic, and
some beautifully-coloured leather out of some dry sticks and sedges.
Then they sailed the boat to the port of Arianrods castle, and,
anchoring it where it could be seen, began ostentatiously to stitch away
at the leather. Naturally, they were soon noticed, and Arianrod sent
someone out to see who they were and what they were doing. When she
found that they were shoemakers, she remembered that she wanted some
shoes. wydion, though he had her measure, purposely made them, first
too large, and then too small. This brought Arianrod herself down to the
boat to be fitted.

While wydion was measuring Arianrods foot for the shoes, a wren came
and stood upon the deck. The boy took his bow and arrow, and hit the
wren in the lega favourite shot of eltic crack archers, at any rate
in romance. The goddess was pleased to be amiable and complimentary.
Truly, said she, the lion aimed at it with a steady hand. It is from
such incidents that primitive people take their names, all the world
over. The boy had got his. It is no thanks to you, said wydion to
Arianrod, but now he has a name. And a good name it is. e shall be
called lew law yffes.

This name of the sun-god is a good eample of how obsolete the ancient
pagan tradition had become before it was put into writing. The old word
leu, meaning light, had passed out of use, and the scribe
substituted for a name that was unintelligible to him one like it which
he knew, namely lew, meaning lion. The word yffes seems also to
have suffered change, and to have meant originally not steady, but
long.

At any rate, Arianrod was defeated in her design to keep her son
nameless. Neither did she even get her shoes; for, as soon as he had
gained his obect, wydion allowed the boat to change back into
sea-weed, and the leather to return to sedge and sticks. So, in her
anger, she put a fresh destiny on the boy, that he should not take arms
till she herself gave them him.

wydion, however, took leu to Dinas Dinllev, his castle, which still
stands at the edge of the Menai Straits, and brought him up as a
warrior. As soon as he thought him old enough to have arms, he took him
with him again to aer Arianrod. This time, they were disguised as
bards. Arianrod received them gladly, heard wydions songs and tales,
feasted them, and prepared a room for them to sleep in.

The net morning, wydion got up very early, and prepared his most
powerful incantations. By his druidical arts he made it seem as if the
whole country rang with the shouts and trumpets of an army, and he put a
glamour over everyone, so that they saw the bay filled with ships.
Arianrod came to him in terror, asking what could be done to protect the
castle. ive us arms, he replied, and we will do the best we can. So
Arianrods maidens armed wydion, while Arianrod herself put arms on
leu. By the time she had finished, all the noises had ceased, and the
ships had vanished. et us take our arms off again, said wydion; we
shall not need them now. But the army is all round the castle! cried
Arianrod. There was no army, answered wydion; it was only an
illusion of mine to cause you to break your prophecy and give our son
arms. And now he has got them, without thanks to you. Then I will lay
a worse destiny on him, cried the infuriated goddess. e shall never
have a wife of the people of this earth. e shall have a wife in spite
of you, said wydion.

So wydion went to Mth, his uncle and tutor in magic, and between them
they made a woman out of flowers by charms and illusion. They took the
blossoms of the oak, and the blossoms of the broom, and the blossoms of
the meadow-sweet, and produced from them a maiden, the fairest and most
graceful that man ever saw. They called her Blodeuwedd Flower-face,
and gave her to leu as his wife. And they gave leu a palace called Mur
y astell, near Bala ake.

All went well until, one day, ronw ebyr, one of the gods of darkness,
came by, hunting, and killed the stag at nightfall near leus castle.
The sun-god was away upon a visit to Mth, but Blodeuwedd asked the
stranger to take shelter with her. That night they fell in love with one
another, and conspired together how leu might be put away. When leu
came back from Mths court, Blodeuwedd, like a eltic Dalilah, wormed
out of him the secret of how his life was preserved. e told her that he
could only die in one way; he could not be killed either inside or
outside a house, either on horseback or on foot, but that if a spear
that had been a year in the making, and which was never worked upon
ecept during the sacrifice on Sunday, were to be cast at him as he
stood beneath a roof of thatch, after having ust bathed, with one foot
upon the edge of the bath and the other upon a buck goats back, it
would cause his death. Blodeuwedd piously thanked eaven that he was so
well protected, and sent a messenger to her paramour, telling him what
she had learned. ronw set to work on the spear; and in a year it was
ready. When she knew this, Blodeuwedd asked leu to show her eactly how
it was he could be killed.

leu agreed; and Blodeuwedd prepared the bath under the thatched roof,
and tethered the goat by it. leu bathed, and then stood with one foot
upon the edge of the bath, and the other upon the goats back. At this
moment, ronw, from an ambush, flung the spear, and hit leu, who, with
a terrible cry, changed into an eagle, and flew away. e never came
back; and ronw took possession of both his wife and his palace.

But wydion set out to search everywhere for his son. At last, one day,
he came to a house in North Wales where the man was in great aniety
about his sow; for as soon as the sty was opened, every morning, she
rushed out, and did not return again till late in the evening. wydion
offered to follow her, and, at dawn, the man took him to the sty, and
opened the door. The sow leaped forth, and ran, and wydion ran after
her. e tracked her to a brook between Snowdon and the sea, still called
Nant y lew, and saw her feeding underneath an oak. pon the top of the
tree there was an eagle, and, every time it shook itself, there fell off
it lumps of putrid meat, which the sow ate greedily. wydion suspected
that the eagle must be leu. So he sang this verse:

  Oak that grows between the two banks;
   Darkened is the sky and hill!
   Shall I not tell him by his wounds,
   That this is leu?

The eagle, on hearing this, came half-way down the tree. So wydion
sang:

  Oak that grows in upland ground,
   Is it not wetted by the rain? as it not been drenched
   By nine score tempests?
   It bears in its branches leu law yffes.

The eagle came slowly down until it was on the lowest branch. wydion
sang:

  Oak that grows beneath the steep;
   Stately and maestic is its aspect!
   Shall I not speak it?
   That leu will come to my lap?

Then the eagle came down, and sat on wydions knee. wydion struck it
with his magic wand, and it became leu again, wasted to skin and bone
by the poison on the spear.

wydion took him to Mth to be healed, and left him there, while he went
to Mur y astell, where Blodeuwedd was. When she heard that he was
coming, she fled. But wydion overtook her, and changed her into an owl,
the bird that hates the day. A still older form of this probably
etremely ancient myth of the sun-godthe savage and repulsive details
of which speak of a hoary antiquitymakes the chase of Blodeuwedd by
wydion to have taken place in the sky, the stars scattered over the
Milky Way being the traces of it. As for her accomplice, leu would
accept no satisfaction short of ronws submitting to stand eactly
where leu had stood, to be shot at in his turn. To this he was obliged
to agree; and leu killed him.

There are two other sons of Beli and Dn of whom so little is recorded
that it would hardly be worth while mentioning them, were it not for the
wild poetry of the legend connected with them. The tale, put into
writing at a time when all the gods were being transfigured into simple
mortals, tells us that they were two kings of Britain, brothers. One
starlight night they were walking together. See, said Nynniaw to
eibaw, what a fine, wide-spreading field I have. Where is it? asked
eibaw. There, replied Nynniaw; the whole stretch of the sky, as far
as the eye reaches. ook then, returned eibaw, what a number of
cattle I have grazing on your field. Where are they? asked Nynniaw.
All the stars that you can see, replied eibaw, every one of them of
fiery-coloured gold, with the moon for a shepherd over them. They
shall not feed on my field, cried Nynniaw. They shall, eclaimed
eibaw. They shall not, cried Nynniaw, They shall, said eibaw.
They shall not, Nynniaw answered; and so they went on, from
contradiction to quarrel, and from private quarrel to civil war, until
the armies of both of them were destroyed, and the two authors of the
evil were turned by od into oen for their sins.

ast of the children of Dn, we find a goddess called enardun, of whom
little is known ecept that she was married to the sea-god lyr. This
incident is curious, as forming a parallel to the aelic story which
tells of intermarriage between the Tuatha D Danann and the Fomors.
Brigit, the Dagdas daughter, was married to Bress, son of lathan,
while ian, the son of Diancecht, wedded thniu, the daughter of Balor.
So, in this kindred mythology, a slender tie of relationship binds the
gods of the sky to the gods of the sea.

The name lyr is supposed, like its Irish equivalent r, to have
meant the Sea. The British sea-god is undoubtedly the same as the
aelic; indeed, the two facts that he is described in Welsh literature
as lyr lediath, that is, lyr of the Foreign Dialect, and is given a
wife called Iweridd Ireland, suggest that he may have been
borrowed by the Britons from the aels later than any mythology common
to both. As a British god, he was the far-off original of Shakespeares
ing ear. The chief city of his worship is still called after him,
eicester, that is, lyr-cestre, in still earlier days, aer lyr.

lyr, we have noticed, married two wives, enardun and Iweridd. By the
daughter of Dn he had a son called Manawyddan, who is identical with
the aelic Manannn mac ir. We know less of his character and
attributes than we do of the Irish god; but we find him equally a ruler
in that ades or lysium which the eltic mind ever connected with the
sea. ike all the inhabitants of that other world, he is at once a
master of magic and of the useful arts, which he taught willingly to his
friends. To his enemies, however, he could show a different side of his
character. A triad tells us that

  The achievement of Manawyddan the Wise,
   After lamentation and fiery wrath,
   Was the constructing of the bone-fortress of Oeth and Anoeth,

which is described as a prison made, in the shape of a bee-hive,
entirely of human bones mortared together, and divided into innumerable
cells, forming a kind of labyrinth. In this ghastly place he immured
those whom he found trespassing in ades; and among his captives was no
less a person than the famous Arthur.

Ireland bore two children to lyr: a daughter called Branwen and a son
called Brn. The little we know of Branwen of the Fair Bosom shows her
as a goddess of lovechild, like the reek Aphrodit, of the sea. Brn,
on the other hand, is, even more clearly than Manawyddan, a dark deity
of ades. e is represented as of colossal size, so huge, in fact, that
no house or ship was big enough to hold him. e delighted in battle
and carnage, like the hoodie-crow or raven from which he probably took
his name, but he was also the especial patron of bards, minstrels,
and musicians, and we find him in one of the poems ascribed to Taliesin
claiming to be himself a bard, a harper, a player on the crowth, and
seven-score other musicians all at once. is son was called
aradawc the Strong-armed, who, as the British mythology crumbled,
became confounded with the historical aratacus, known popularly as
aractacus.

Both Brn and Manawyddan were especially connected with the Swansea
peninsula. The bone-fortress of Oeth and Anoeth was placed by tradition
in ower. That Brn was equally at home there may be proved from
the Morte Darthur, in which storehouse of forgotten and misunderstood
mythology Brn of ower survives as ing Brandegore.

Such identification of a mere mortal country with the other world seems
strange enough to us, but to our eltic ancestors it was a quite natural
thought. All islandsand peninsulas, which, viewed from an opposite
coast, probably seemed to them islandswere deemed to be pre-eminently
homes of the dark owers of ades. Difficult of access, protected by the
turbulent and dangerous sea, sometimes rendered quite invisible by fogs
and mists and, at other times, looming up ghostlily on the horizon,
often held by the remnant of a hostile lower race, they gained a mystery
and a sanctity from the law of the human mind which has always held the
unknown to be the terrible. The ornish Britons, gazing from the shore,
saw ower and undy, and deemed them outposts of the over-sea Other
World. To the Britons of Wales, Ireland was no human realm, a view
reciprocated by the aels, who saw ades in Britain, while the Isle of
Man was a little ades common to them both. Nor even was the sea always
necessary to sunder the world of ghosts from that of shadow-casting
men. lastonbury Tor, surrounded by almost impassable swamps, was one
of the especial haunts of wyn ap Nudd. The Britons of the north held
that beyond the oman wall and the vast aledonian wood lived ghosts and
not men. ven the oman province of Demetiacalled by the Welsh Dyfed,
and corresponding, roughly, to the modern ounty of embrokeshirewas,
as a last stronghold of the aborigines, identified with the mythic
underworld.

As such, Dyfed was ruled by a local tribe of gods, whose greatest
figures were wyll, ead of Annwn the Welsh name for ades, with his
wife hiannon, and their son ryderi. These beings are described as
hostile to the children of Dn, but friendly to the race of lyr. After
wylls death or disappearance, his widow hiannon becomes the wife of
Manawyddan. In a poem of Taliesins we find Manawyddan and ryderi
oint-rulers of ades, and warders of that magic cauldron of
inspiration which the gods of light attempted to steal or capture,
and which became famous afterwards as the oly rail. Another of their
treasures were the Three Birds of hiannon, which, we are told in an
ancient book, could sing the dead to life and the living into the sleep
of death. Fortunately they sang seldom. There are three things, says a
Welsh triad, which are not often heard: the song of the birds of
hiannon, a song of wisdom from the mouth of a Saon, and an invitation
to a feast from a miser.

Nor is the list of British gods complete without mention of Arthur,
though most readers will be surprised to find him in such company. The
genius of Tennyson, who drew his materials mostly from the Norman-French
romances, has stereotyped the popular conception of Arthur as a king of
early Britain who fought for his fatherland and the hristian faith
against invading Saons. ossibly there may, indeed, have been a
powerful British chieftain bearing that typically eltic name, which is
found in Irish legend as Artur, one of the sons of Nemed who fought
against the Fomors, and on the ontinent as Artaius, a aulish deity
whom the omans identified with Mercury, and who seems to have been a
patron of agriculture. But the original Arthur stands upon the same
ground as uchulainn and Finn. is deeds are mythical, because
superhuman. is companions can be shown to have been divine. Some we
know were worshipped in aul. Others are children of Dn, of lyr, and
of wyll, dynasties of older gods to whose head Arthur seems to have
risen, as his cult waed and theirs waned. Stripped of their godhead,
and strangely transformed, they fill the pages of romance as nights of
the Table ound.

These deities were the native gods of Britain. Many others are, however,
mentioned upon inscriptions found in our island, but these were almost
all eotic and imported. Imperial ome brought men of diverse races
among her legions, and these men brought their gods. Scattered over
Britain, but especially in the north, near the Wall, we find evidence
that deities of many nationsfrom ermany to Africa, and from aul to
ersiawere sporadically worshipped. Most of these foreign gods
were oman, but a temple at boracum now ork was dedicated to
Serapis, and Mithras, the ersian sun-god, was also adored there; while
at orbridge, in Northumberland the ancient orspitium, there have
been found altars to the Tyrian ercules and to Astarte. The war-god was
also invoked under many strange namesas ocidius by a colony of
Dacians in umberland; as Toutates, amulus, oritiacus, Belatucador,
Alator, oucetius, ondates, and igisamos by men of different
countries. A goddess of war was worshipped at Bath under the name of
Nemetona. The hot springs of the same town were under the patronage of a
divinity called Sul, identified by the omans with Minerva, and she was
helped by a god of medicine described on a dedicatory tablet as Sol
Apollo Anicetus. Few of these strange gods, however, seem to have
taken hold of the imagination of the native Britons. Their worshippers
did not proselytize, and their general influence was probably about
equal to that of an vangelical hurch in a Turkish town. The sole
eceptions to this rule are where the foreign gods are aulish; but in
several instances it can be proved that they were not so much of oman,
as of original eltic importation. The warlike heaven-god amulus
appears in aelic heroic myth as umhal, the father of Finn, and in
British mythical history as oel, a duke of aer oelvin known earlier
as amulodunum, and now as olchester, who seized the crown of Britain,
and spent his short reign in a series of battles. The name of the
sun-god Maponos is found alike upon altars in aul and Britain, and in
Welsh literature as Mabon, a follower of Arthur; while another aulish
sun-god, Belinus, who had a splendid temple at Baocassos the modern
Bayeu, though not mentioned in the earliest British mythology, as its
scattered records have come down to us, must have been connected with
Brn, for we find in eoffrey of Monmouths istory ing Belinus as
brother of ing Brennius, and in the Morte Darthur Balin as
brother of Balan. A second-century reek writer gives an account
of a god of eloquence worshipped in aul under the name of Ogmios, and
represented as equipped like eracles, a description which eactly
corresponds to the conception of the aelic Ogma, at once patron of
literature and writing and professional strong man of the Tuatha D
Danann. Nemetona, the war-goddess worshipped at Bath, was probably the
same as Nemon, one of Nuadas alkyr-wives, while a broken inscription
to athubodva, which probably stood, when intact, for athubodva, may
well have been addressed to the aulish equivalent of Badb atha, the
War-fury. ugh, or leu, was also widely known on the ontinent as
ugus. Three important townsaon, eyden, and yonswere all anciently
called after him ugu-dunum ugus town, and at the last and
greatest of these a festival was still held in oman times upon the
sun-gods daythe first of Augustwhich corresponded to the ugnassad
ughs commemoration held in ancient Ireland. Brigit, the aelic
Minerva, is also found in Britain as Brigantia, tutelary goddess of the
Brigantes, a Northern tribe, and in astern France as Brigindo, to whom
Iccavos, son of Oppianos, made a dedicatory offering of which there is
still record.

Other, less striking agreements between the mythical divine names of the
Insular and ontinental elts might be cited. These recorded should,
however, prove sufficiently that aul, ael, and Briton shared in a
common heritage of mythological names and ideas, which they separately
developed into three superficially different, but essentially similar
cults.

-----

Footnote :

  ady uests Mabinogion, a note to Math, the Son of Mathonwy.

Footnote :

  The Story of ludd and levelys. See chap. IThe Decline and
  Fall of the ods.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  See a monograph by the ight on. harles Bathurst: oman Antiquities
  in ydney ark, loucestershire.

Footnote :

  chap. IThe Decline and Fall of the ods.

Footnote :

  ibbert ectures, pp. , .

Footnote :

  So translated by ady uest. rofessor hys, however, renders it, in
  whom od has put the instinct of the demons of Annwn. Arthurian
  egend, p. .

Footnote :

  ady uests Mabinogion. Note to ulhwch and Olwen.

Footnote :

  Black Book of aermarthen, poem III. ol. I, p. , of Skenes
  Four Ancient Books.

Footnote :

  I have taken the liberty of omitting a few lines whose connection with
  their contet is not very apparent.

Footnote :

  wyn was said to specially frequent the summits of hills.

Footnote :

  This line is rofessor hyss. Skene translates it: Whilst I am
  called wyn the son of Nudd.

Footnote :

  I have here preferred hyss rendering: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  A name for ades, of unknown meaning.

Footnote :

  Dormarth means Deaths Door. hys: Arthurian egend, pp. -.

Footnote :

  hys has it:

                Dormarth, red-nosed, ground-grazing
                 On him we perceived the speed
                 Of thy wandering on loud Mount.

                              Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. . Skene translates: I am alive, they
  in their graves!

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, pp. -.

Footnote :

  Dyer: Studies of the ods in reece, p. .

  wyn, son of Nudd, had a brother, deyrn, of whom so little has come
  down to us that he finds his most suitable place in a foot-note.
  nmentioned in the earliest Welsh legends, he first appears as a
  knight of Arthurs court in the ed Book stories of ulhwch and
  Olwen, the Dream of honabwy, and eraint, the Son of rbin. e
  accompanied Arthur on his epedition to ome, and is said also to have
  slain three most atrocious giants at Brentenol Brent noll, near
  lastonbury. is name occurs in a catalogue of Welsh saints, where he
  is described as a bard, and the chapel of Bodedyrn, near olyhead,
  still stands to his honour. Modern readers will know him from
  Tennysons Idyll of eraint and nid, which follows very closely the
  Welsh romance of eraint, the Son of rbin.

Footnote :

  hyswho calls him a ambrian luto: ectures on Welsh hilology,
  p. .

Footnote :

  Book of Taliesin, III. The Death-song of Dylan, Son of the Wave,
  ol. I, p.  of Skene.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: eltic Folklore, p. .

Footnote :

  i.e. The ion with the Steady and.

Footnote :

  See hys: ibbert ectures, note to p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  etold from the Mabinogi of Math, Son of Mathonwy, in ady uests
  Mabinogion.

Footnote :

  The Iolo Manuscripts: collected by dward Williams, the bard, at about
  the beginning of the nineteenth centuryThe Tale of hitta awr.

Footnote :

  See hapter IIThe ise of the Sun-od.

Footnote :

  hys: Studies in the Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  The old Irish tract called oir Anmann the hoice of Names says:
  Manannan mac ir ... the Britons and the men of rin deemed that he
  was the god of the sea.

Footnote :

  Iolo MSS., stanza  of The Stanzas of the Achievements, composed
  by the Azure Bard of the hair.

Footnote :

  See note to chap. IIThe Treasures of Britain.

Footnote :

  Mabinogi of Branwen, Daughter of lyr.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  Book of Taliesin, poem III, in Skenes Four Ancient Books of
  Wales, ol. I, p. .

Footnote :

  The erses of the raves of the Warriors, in the Black Book of
  aermarthen. See also hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: Studies in the Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  Mabinogi of Manawyddan, Son of lyr.

Footnote :

  Book of Taliesin, poem iv, ol. I, p. , of Skene.

Footnote :

  hys: Studies in the Arthurian egend, p.  and note.

Footnote :

  See a paper in the dinburgh eview for uly, The omans in
  Britain.

Footnote :

  It is said that the Old ing ole of the popular ballad, who was a
  merry old soul, represents the last faint tradition of the eltic
  god.

Footnote :

  eoffrey of Monmouth, Book III, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  For full account of aulish gods, and their aelic and British
  affinities, see hys: ibbert ectures, I and IIThe aulish
  antheon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT II

                  T ADNTS OF T ODS OF ADS


It is with the family of wyll, deities connected with the south-west
corner of Wales, called by the omans Demetia, and by the Britons Dyfed,
and, roughly speaking, identical with the modern county of
embrokeshire, that the earliest consecutive accounts of the British
gods begin. The first of the Four Branches of the Mabinogi tell us how
wyll, rince of Dyfed, gained the right to be called en Annwn, the
ead of ades. Indeed, it almost seems as if it had been deliberately
written to eplain how the same person could be at once a mere mortal
prince, however legendary, and a ruler in the mystic Other World, and so
to reconcile two conflicting traditions. But to an earlier age than
that in which the legend was put into a literary shape, such forced
reconciliation would not have been needed; for the two legends would not
have been considered to conflict. When wyll, head of Annwn, was a
mythic person whose tradition was still alive, the uneplored, rugged,
and savage country of Dyfed, populated by the aboriginal Iberians whom
the elt had driven into such remote districts, appeared to those who
dwelt upon the eastern side of its dividing river, the Taw, at least a
dependency of Annwn, if not that weird realm itself. But, as men grew
bolder, the frontier was crossed, and Dyfed entered and traversed, and
found to be not so unlike other countries. Its inhabitants, if not of
eltic race, were yet of flesh and blood. So that, though the province
still continued to bear to a late date the names of the and of
Illusion and the ealm of lamour, it was no longer deemed to be
ades itself. That fitful and shadowy country had folded its tents, and
departed over or under seas.

The story of wyll, rince of Dyfed, tells us how there was war
in Annwn between its two kingsor between two, perhaps, of its many
chieftains. Arawn Silver-Tongue and avgan Summer-White each
coveted the dominions of the other. In the continual contests between
them, Arawn was worsted, and in despair he visited the upper earth to
seek for a mortal ally.

At this time wyll, rince of Dyfed, held his court at Narberth. e had,
however, left his capital upon a hunting epedition to lyn ch, known
to-day as a valley upon the borders of the two counties of embroke and
armarthen. ike so many kings of uropean and Oriental romance, when an
adventure is at hand, he became separated from his party, and was, in
modern parlance, thrown out. e could, however, still hear the music
of his hounds, and was listening to them, when he also distinguished the
cry of another pack coming towards him. As he watched and listened, a
stag came into view; and the strange hounds pulled it down almost at his
feet. At first wyll hardly looked at the stag, he was so taken up with
gazing at the hounds, for of all the hounds that he had seen in the
world, he had never seen any that were like unto these. For their hair
was of a brilliant shining white, and their ears were red; and as the
whiteness of their bodies shone, so did the redness of their ears
glisten. They were, indeed, though wyll does not seem to have known
it, of the true ades breedthe snow-white, red-eared hounds we meet in
aelic legends, and which are still said to be sometimes heard and seen
scouring the hills of Wales by night. Seeing no rider with the hounds,
wyll drove them away from the dead stag, and called up his own pack to
it.

While he was doing this, a man upon a large, light-gray steed, with a
hunting-horn round his neck, and clad in garments of gray woollen in the
fashion of a hunting garb appeared, and rated wyll for his
unsportsmanlike conduct. reater discourtesy, said he, I never saw
than your driving away my dogs after they had killed the stag, and
calling your own to it. And though I may not be revenged upon you for
this, I swear that I will do you more damage than the value of a hundred
stags.

wyll epressed his contrition, and, asking the new-comers name and
rank, offered to atone for his fault. The stranger told his nameArawn,
a king of Annwnand said that wyll could gain his forgiveness only in
one way, by going to Annwn instead of him, and fighting for him with
avgan. wyll agreed to do this, and the ing of ades put his own
semblance upon the mortal prince, so that not a person in Annwnnot even
Arawns own wifewould know that he was not that king. e led him by a
secret path into Annwn, and left him before his castle, charging him to
return to the place where they had first met, at the end of a year from
that day. On the other hand, Arawn took on wylls shape, and went to
Narberth.

No one in Annwn suspected wyll of being anyone else than their king. e
spent the year in ruling the realm, in hunting, minstrelsy, and
feasting. Both by day and night, he had the company of Arawns wife, the
most beautiful woman he had ever yet seen, but he refrained from taking
advantage of the trust placed in him. At last the day came when he was
to meet avgan in single combat. One blow settled it; for wyll,
avgans destined conqueror, thrust his antagonist an arms and a
spears length over the crupper of his horse, breaking his shield and
armour, and mortally wounding him. avgan was carried away to die, and
wyll, in the guise of Arawn, received the submission of the dead kings
subects, and anneed his realm. Then he went back to lyn ch, to keep
his tryst with Arawn.

They retook their own shapes, and each returned to his own kingdom.
wyll learned that Dyfed had never been ruled so well, or been so
prosperous, as during the year ust passed. As for the ing of ades, he
found his enemy gone, and his domains etended. And when he caressed his
wife, she asked him why he did so now, after the lapse of a whole year.
So he told her the truth, and they both agreed that they had indeed got
a true friend in wyll.

After this, the kings of Annwn and Dyfed made their friendship strong
between them. From that time forward, says the story, wyll was no
longer called rince of Dyfed, but en Annwn, the ead of ades.

The second mythological incident in the Mabinogi of wyll, rince of
Dyfed, tells how the ead of ades won his wife, hiannon, thought by
rofessor hys to have been a goddess either of the dawn or of the
moon. There was a mound outside wylls palace at Narberth which
had a magical quality. To anyone who sat upon it there happened one of
two things: either he received wounds and blows, or else he saw a
wonder. One day, it occurred to wyll that he would like to try the
eperience of the mound. So he went and sat upon it.

No unseen blows assailed wyll, but he had not been sitting long upon
the mound before he saw, coming towards him, a lady on a pure-white
horse of large size, with a garment of shining gold around her, riding
very quietly. e sent a man on foot to ask her who she was, but, though
she seemed to be moving so slowly, the man could not come up to her. e
failed utterly to overtake her, and she passed on out of sight.

The net day, wyll went again to the mound. The lady appeared, and,
this time, wyll sent a horseman. At first, the horseman only ambled
along at about the same pace at which the lady seemed to be going; then,
failing to get near her, he urged his horse into a gallop. But, whether
he rode slow or fast, he could come no closer to the lady than before,
although she seemed to the eyes of those who watched to have been going
only at a foots pace.

The day after that, wyll determined to accost the lady himself. She
came at the same gentle walk, and wyll at first rode easily, and then
at his horses topmost speed, but with the same result, or lack of it.
At last, in despair, he called to the mysterious damsel to stop. I will
stop gladly, said she, and it would have been better for your horse if
you had asked me before. She told him that her name was hiannon,
daughter of eveydd the Ancient. The nobles of her realm had determined
to give her in marriage against her will, so she had come to seek out
wyll, who was the man of her choice. wyll was delighted to hear this,
for he thought that she was the most beautiful lady he had ever seen.
Before they parted, they had plighted troth, and wyll had promised to
appear on that day twelvemonth at the palace of her father, eveydd.
Then she vanished, and wyll returned to Narberth.

At the appointed time, wyll went to visit eveydd the Ancient, with a
hundred followers. e was received with much welcome, and the
disposition of the feast put under his command, as the elts seem to
have done to especially honoured guests. As they sat at meat, with wyll
between hiannon and her father, a tall auburn-haired youth came into
the hall, greeted wyll, and asked a boon of him. Whatever boon you may
ask of me, said wyll thoughtlessly, if it is in my power, you shall
have it. Then the suitor threw off all disguise, called the guests to
witness wylls promise, and claimed hiannon as his bride. wyll was
dumb. Be silent as long as you will, said the masterful hiannon;
never did a man make worse use of his wits than you have done. ady,
replied the amazed wyll, I knew not who he was. e is the man to
whom they would have given me against my will, she answered, wawl,
the son of ld. ou must bestow me upon him now, lest shame befall
you. Never will I do that, said wyll. Bestow me upon him, she
insisted, and I will cause that I shall never be his. So wyll
promised wawl that he would make a feast that day year, at which he
would resign hiannon to him.

The net year, the feast was made, and hiannon sat by the side of her
unwelcome bridegroom. But wyll was waiting outside the palace, with a
hundred men in ambush. When the banquet was at its height, he came into
the hall, dressed in coarse, ragged garments, shod with clumsy old
shoes, and carrying a leather bag. But the bag was a magic one, which
hiannon had given to her lover, with directions as to its use. Its
quality was that, however much was put into it, it could never be
filled. I crave a boon, he said to wawl. What is it? wawl replied.
I am a poor man, and all I ask is to have this bag filled with meat.
wawl granted what he said was a request within reason, and ordered
his followers to fill the bag. But the more they put into it, the more
room in it there seemed to be. wawl was astonished, and asked why this
was. wyll replied that it was a bag that could never be filled until
someone possessed of lands and riches should tread the food down with
both his feet. Do this for the man, said hiannon to wawl. ladly I
will, replied he, and put both his feet into the bag. But no sooner had
he done so than wyll slipped the bag over wawls head, and tied it up
at the mouth. e blew his horn, and all his followers came in. What
have you got in the bag? asked each one in turn. A badger, replied
wyll. Then each, as he received wylls answer, kicked the bag, or hit
it with a stick. Then, says the story, was the game of Badger in the
Bag first played.

wawl, however, fared better than we suspect that the badger usually
did; for eveydd the Ancient interceded for him. wyll willingly
released him, on condition that he promised to give up all claim to
hiannon, and renounced all proects of revenge. wawl consented, and
gave sureties, and went away to his own country to have his bruises
healed.

This country of wawls was, no doubt, the sky; for he was evidently a
sun-god. is name bewrays him; for the meaning of wawl is
light. It was one of the hours of victory for the dark powers,
such as were celebrated in the eltic calendar by the Feast of Samhain,
or Summer nd.

There was no hindrance now to the marriage of wyll and hiannon. She
became his bride, and returned with him to Dyfed.

For three years, they were without an heir, and the nobles of Dyfed
became discontented. They petitioned wyll to take another wife instead
of hiannon. e asked for a years delay. This was granted, and, before
the end of the year, a son was born. But, on the night of his birth, the
si women set to keep watch over hiannon all fell asleep at once; and
when they woke up, the boy had vanished. Fearful lest their lives should
be forfeited for their neglect, they agreed to swear that hiannon had
eaten her child. They killed a litter of puppies, and smeared some of
the blood on hiannons face and hands, and put some of the bones by her
side. Then they awoke her with a great outcry, and accused her. She
swore that she knew nothing of the death of her son, but the women
persisted that they had seen her devour him, and had been unable to
prevent it. The druids of that day were not sufficiently practical
anatomists to be able to tell the bones of a child from those of a dog,
so they condemned hiannon upon the evidence of the women. But, even
now, wyll would not put her away; so she was assigned a penance. For
seven years, she was to sit by a horse-block outside the gate, and offer
to carry visitors into the palace upon her back. But it rarely
happened, says the Mabinogi, that any would permit her to do so.

actly what had become of hiannons child seems to have been a mystery
even to the writer of the Mabinogi. It was, at any rate, in some way
connected with the equally mysterious disappearance on every night of
the first of MayBeltaine, the eltic sun-festivalof the colts foaled
by a beautiful mare belonging to Teirnyon Twryv liant, one of wylls
vassals. very May-day night, the mare foaled, but no one knew what
became of the colt. Teirnyon decided to find out. e caused the mare to
be taken into a house, and there he watched it, fully armed. arly in
the night, the colt was born. Then there was a great noise, and an arm
with claws came through the window, and gripped the colts mane.
Teirnyon hacked at the arm with his sword, and cut it off. Then he heard
wailing, and opened the door, and found a baby in swaddling clothes,
wrapped in a satin mantle. e took it up and brought it to his wife, and
they decided to adopt it. They called the boy wri Wallt uryn, that is
wri of the olden air.

The older the boy grew, the more it seemed to Teirnyon that he became
like wyll. Then he remembered that he had found him upon the very night
that hiannon lost her child. So he consulted with his wife, and they
both agreed that the baby they had so mysteriously found must be the
same that hiannon had so mysteriously lost. And they decided that it
would not be right for them to keep the son of another, while so good a
lady as hiannon was being punished wrongfully.

So, the very net day, Teirnyon set out for Narberth, taking the boy
with him. They found hiannon sitting, as usual, by the gate, but they
would not allow her to carry them into the palace on her back. wyll
welcomed them; and that evening, as they sat at supper, Teirnyon told
his hosts the story from beginning to end. And he presented her son to
hiannon.

As soon as everyone in the palace saw the boy, they admitted that he
must be wylls son. So they adopted him with delight; and endaran
Dyfed, the head druid of the kingdom, gave him a new name. e called him
ryderi, meaning trouble, from the first word that his mother
had uttered when he was restored to her. For she had said: Trouble
is, indeed, at an end for me, if this be true.

-----

Footnote :

  hys: Studies in the Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  It is constantly so-called by the fourteenth-century Welsh poet,
  Dafydd ab wilym, so much admired by eorge Borrow.

Footnote :

  This chapter is retold from ady uests translation of the Mabinogi
  of wyll, rince of Dyfed.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p.  and note. ld was probably the
  goddess of the iver lyde. See hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  ronounced ridary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             AT III

                     T WOOIN OF BANWN AND T
                         BADIN OF BN


In the second of the Four Branches, ryderi, come to mans estate, and
married to a wife called icva, appears as a guest or vassal at the
court of a greater god of ades than himselfBrn, the son of the
sea-god lyr. The children of lyrBrn, with his sister Branwen of the
Fair Bosom and his half-brother Manawyddan, as well as two sons of
Manawyddans mother, enardun, by an earlier marriage, were holding
court at Twr Branwen, Branwens Tower, now called arlech. As they
sat on a cliff, looking over the sea, they saw thirteen ships coming
from Ireland. The fleet sailed close under the land, and Brn sent
messengers to ask who they were, and why they had come. It was replied
that they were the vessels of Matholwch, ing of Ireland, and that he
had come to ask Brn for his sister Branwen in marriage. Brn consented,
and they fied upon Aberffraw, in Anglesey, as the place at which to
hold the wedding feast. Matholwch and his fleet went there by sea, and
Brn and his host by land. When they arrived, and met, they set up
pavilions; for no house could ever hold the blessed Brn. And there
Branwen became the ing of Irelands bride.

These relations were not long, however, allowed to be friendly. Of the
two other sons of lyrs wife, enardun, the mother of Manawyddan, one
was called Nissyen, and the other, vnissyen. Nissyen was a lover of
peace, and would always cause his family to be friends when their wrath
was at the highest, but vnissyen would cause strife between his two
brothers when they were most at peace. Now vnissyen was enraged
because his consent had not been asked to Branwens marriage. Out of
spite at this, he cut off the lips, ears, eyebrows, and tails of all
Matholwchs horses.

When the ing of Ireland found this out, he was very indignant at the
insult. But Brn sent an embassy to him twice, eplaining that it had
not been done by his consent or with his knowledge. e appeased
Matholwch by giving him a sound horse in place of every one that
vnissyen had mutilated, as well as a staff of silver as large and tall
as Matholwch himself, and a plate of gold as broad as Matholwchs face.
To these gifts he also added a magic cauldron brought from Ireland. Its
property was that any slain man who was put into it was brought to life
again, ecept that he lost the use of speech. The ing of Ireland
accepted this recompense for the insult done him, renewed his friendship
with the children of lyr, and sailed away with Branwen to Ireland.

Before a year was over, Branwen bore a son. They called him wern, and
put him out to be foster-nursed among the best men of Ireland. But,
during the second year, news came to Ireland of the insult that
Matholwch had received in Britain. The ing of Irelands foster-brothers
and near relations insisted that he should revenge himself upon Branwen.
So the queen was compelled to serve in the kitchen, and, every day, the
butcher gave her a bo upon the ear. That this should not become known
to Brn, all traffic was forbidden between Ireland and Britain. This
went on for three years.

But, in the meantime, Branwen had reared a tame starling, and she taught
it to speak, and tied a letter of complaint to the root of its wing, and
sent it off to Britain. At last it found Brn, whom its mistress had
described to it, and settled upon his shoulder, ruffling its wings. This
eposed the letter, and Brn read it. e sent messengers to one hundred
and forty-four countries, to raise an army to go to Ireland. eaving his
son aradawc, with seven others, in charge of Britain, he
startedhimself wading through the sea, while his men went by ship.

No one in Ireland knew that they were coming until the royal swineherds,
tending their pigs near the sea-shore, beheld a marvel. They saw a
forest on the surface of the seaa place where certainly no forest had
been beforeand, near it, a mountain with a lofty ridge on its top, and
a lake on each side of the ridge. Both the forest and the mountain were
swiftly moving towards Ireland. They informed Matholwch, who could not
understand it, and sent messengers to ask Branwen what she thought it
might be. It is the men of the Island of the Mighty, said she,
who are coming here because they have heard of my ill-treatment. The
forest that is seen on the sea is made of the masts of ships. The
mountain is my brother Brn, wading into shoal water; the lofty ridge is
his nose, and the two lakes, one on each side of it, are his eyes.

The men of Ireland were terrified. They fled beyond the Shannon, and
broke down the bridge over it. But Brn lay down across the river, and
his army walked over him to the opposite side.

Matholwch now sent messengers suing for peace. e offered to resign the
throne of Ireland to wern, Branwens son and Brns nephew. Shall I
not have the kingdom myself? said Brn, and would not hear of anything
else. So the counsellors of Matholwch advised him to conciliate Brn by
building him a house so large that it would be the first house that had
ever held him, and, in it, to hand over the kingdom to his will. Brn
consented to accept this, and the vast house was built.

It concealed treachery. pon each side of the hundred pillars of the
house was hung a bag, and in the bag was an armed man, who was to cut
himself out at a given signal. But vnissyen came into the house, and
seeing the bags there, suspected the plot. What is in this bag? he
said to one of the Irish, as he came up to the first one. Meal,
replied the Irishman. Then vnissyen kneaded the bag in his hands, as
though it really contained meal, until he had killed the man inside; and
he treated all of them in turn in the same way.

A little later, the two hosts met in the house. The men of Ireland came
in on one side, and the men of Britain on the other, and met at the
hearth in the middle, and sat down. The Irish court did homage to Brn,
and they crowned wern, Branwens son, ing of Ireland in place of
Matholwch. When the ceremonies were over, the boy went from one to
another of his uncles, to make acquaintance with them. Brn fondled and
caressed him, and so did Manawyddan, and Nissyen. But when he came to
vnissyen, the wicked son of enardun seized the child by the feet, and
dropped him head first into the great fire.

When Branwen saw her son killed, she tried to leap into the flames after
him, but Brn held her back. Then every man armed himself, and such a
tumult was never heard in one house before. Day after day they fought;
but the Irish had the advantage, for they had only to plunge their dead
men into the magic cauldron to bring them back to life. When vnissyen
knew this, he saw a way of atoning for the misfortunes his evil nature
had brought upon Britain. e disguised himself as an Irishman, and lay
upon the floor as if dead, until they put him into the cauldron. Then he
stretched himself, and, with one desperate effort, burst both the
cauldron and his own heart.

Thus things were made equal again, and in the net battle the men of
Britain killed all the Irish. But of themselves there were only seven
left unhurtryderi; Manawyddan; luneu, the son of Taran; Taliesin
the Bard; nawc; rudyen, the son of Muryel; and eilyn, the son of
wynn the Ancient.

Brn himself was wounded in the foot with a poisoned dart, and was in
agony. So he ordered his seven surviving followers to cut off his head,
and to take it to the White Mount in ondon, and bury it there,
with the face towards France. e prophesied how they would perform the
ourney. At arlech they would be feasting seven years, the birds of
hiannon singing to them all the time, and Brns own head conversing
with them as agreeably as when it was on his body. Then they would be
fourscore years at wales. All this while, Brns head would remain
uncorrupted, and would talk so pleasantly that they would forget the
flight of time. But, at the destined hour, someone would open a door
which looked towards ornwall, and, after that, they could stay no
longer, but must hurry to ondon to bury the head.

So the seven beheaded Brn, and set off, taking Branwen also with them.
They landed at the mouth of the iver Alaw, in Anglesey. Branwen first
looked back towards Ireland, and then forward towards Britain. Alas,
she cried, that I was ever born! two islands have been destroyed
because of me. er heart broke with sorrow, and she died. An old Welsh
poem says, with a touch of real pathos:

                Softened were the voices in the brakes
                 Of the wondering birds
                 On seeing the fair body.
                 Will there not be relating again
                 Of that which befel the paragon
                 At the stream of Amlwch?

They made her a four-sided grave, says the Mabinogi, and buried her
upon the banks of the Alaw. The traditionary spot has always borne the
name of nys Branwen, and, curiously enough, an urn was found there,
in , full of ashes and half-burnt bones, which certain enthusiastic
local antiquaries saw every reason to suppose were those of the fair
British Aphrodit herself.

The seven went on towards arlech, and, as they ourneyed, they met men
and women who gave them the latest news. aswallawn, a son of Beli, the
husband of Dn, had destroyed the ministers left behind by Brn to take
care of Britain. e had made himself invisible by the help of a magic
veil, and thus had killed all of them ecept endaran Dyfed,
foster-father of ryderi, who had escaped into the woods, and aradawc
son of Brn, whose heart had broken from grief. Thus he had made himself
king of the whole island in place of Manawyddan, its rightful heir now
that Brn was dead.

owever, the destiny was upon the seven that they should go on with
their leaders head. They went to arlech and feasted for seven years,
the three birds of hiannon singing them songs compared with which all
other songs seemed unmelodious. Then they spent fourscore years in the
Isle of wales, eating and drinking, and listening to the pleasant
conversation of Brns head. The ntertaining of the Noble ead this
eighty years feast was called. Brns head, indeed, is almost more
notable in British mythology than Brn before he was decapitated.
Taliesin and the other bards invoke it repeatedly as rddawl Ben the
enerable ead and ther Ben the Wonderful ead.

But all pleasure came to an end when eilyn, the son of wynn, opened
the forbidden door, like Bluebeards wife, to know if that was true
which was said concerning it. As soon as they looked towards ornwall,
the glamour that had kept them merry for eighty-seven years failed, and
left them as grieved about the death of their lord as though it had
happened that very day. They could not rest for sorrow, but went at once
to ondon, and laid the now dumb and corrupting head in its grave on
Tower ill, with its face turned towards France, to watch that no foe
came from foreign lands to Britain. There it reposed until, ages
afterwards, Arthur, in his pride of heart, dug it up, as he thought it
beneath his dignity to hold the island otherwise than by valour.
Disaster, in the shape of

                            the godless hosts
            Of heathen swarming oer the Northern sea,

came of this disinterment; and therefore it is called, in a triad, one
of the Three Wicked ncoverings of Britain.

-----

Footnote :

  etold from ady uests translation of the Mabinogi of Branwen, the
  Daughter of lyr.

Footnote :

  hysectures on Welsh hilologycompares Matholwch with Mth, and
  the story, generally, with the reek myth of ersephon.

Footnote :

  A bardic name for Britain.

Footnote :

  This personage may have been the same as the aulish god Taranis.
  Mention, too, is made in an ancient Irish glossary of tirun, an idol
  of the Britons.

Footnote :

  This spot, called by a twelfth-century Welsh poet The White minence
  of ondon, a place of splendid fame, was probably the hill on which
  the Tower of ondon now stands.

Footnote :

  The island of resholm, off the coast of embrokeshire.

Footnote :

  The ododin of Aneurin, as translated by T. Stephens. Branwen is
  there called the lady Bradwen.

Footnote :

  See note to Branwen, the Daughter of lyr in ady uests
  Mabinogion.

Footnote :

  Tennyson: Idylls of the inguinevere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT I

                      T WA OF NANTMNTS


Manawyddan was now the sole survivor of the family of lyr. e was
homeless and landless. But ryderi offered to give him a realm in Dyfed,
and his mother, hiannon, for a wife. The lady, her son eplained, was
still not uncomely, and her conversation was pleasing. Manawyddan seems
to have found her attractive, while hiannon was not less taken with the
son of lyr. They were wedded, and so great became the friendship of
ryderi and icva, Manawyddan and hiannon, that the four were seldom
apart.

One day, after holding a feast at Narberth, they went up to the same
magic mound where hiannon had first met wyll. As they sat there,
thunder pealed, and immediately a thick mist sprang up, so that not one
of them could see the other. When it cleared, they found themselves
alone in an uninhabited country. cept for their own castle, the land
was desert and untilled, without sign of dwelling, man, or beast. One
touch of some unknown magic had utterly changed the face of Dyfed from a
rich realm to a wilderness.

Manawyddan and ryderi, hiannon and icva traversed the country on all
sides, but found nothing ecept desolation and wild beasts. For two
years they lived in the open upon game and honey.

During the third year, they grew weary of this wild life, and decided to
go into loegyr, and support themselves by some handicraft.
Manawyddan could make saddles, and he made them so well that soon no one
in ereford, where they had settled, would buy from any saddler but
himself. This aroused the enmity of all the other saddlers, and they
conspired to kill the strangers. So the four went to another city.

ere they made shields, and soon no one would purchase a shield unless
it had been made by Manawyddan and ryderi. The shield-makers became
ealous, and again a move had to be made.

But they fared no better at the net town, where they practised the
craft of cordwainers, Manawyddan shaping the shoes and ryderi stitching
them. So they went back to Dyfed again, and occupied themselves in
hunting.

One day, the hounds of Manawyddan and ryderi roused a white wild boar.
They chased it till they came to a castle at a place where both the
huntsmen were certain that no castle had been before. Into this castle
went the boar, and the hounds after it. For some time, Manawyddan and
ryderi waited in vain for their return. ryderi then proposed that he
should go into the castle, and see what had become of them. Manawyddan
tried to dissuade him, declaring that whoever their enemy was who had
laid Dyfed waste had also caused the appearance of this castle. But
ryderi insisted upon entering.

In the castle, he found neither the boar nor his hounds, nor any trace
of man or beast. There was nothing but a fountain in the centre of the
castle floor, and, on the brink of the fountain, a beautiful golden bowl
fastened to a marble slab by chains.

ryderi was so pleased with the beauty of the bowl that he put out his
hands and took hold of it. Whereupon his hands stuck to the bowl, so
that he could not move from where he stood.

Manawyddan waited for him till the evening, and then returned to the
palace, and told hiannon. She, more daring than her husband, rebuked
him for cowardice, and went straight to the magic castle. In the court
she found ryderi, his hands still glued to the bowl and his feet to the
slab. She tried to free him, but became fied, herself, and, with a clap
of thunder and a fall of mist, the castle vanished with its two
prisoners.

Manawyddan was now left alone with icva, ryderis wife. e calmed her
fears, and assured her of his protection. But they had lost their dogs,
and could not hunt any more, so they set out together to loegyr, to
practise again Manawyddans old trade of cordwainer. A second time, the
envious cordwainers conspired to kill them, so they were obliged to
return to Dyfed.

But Manawyddan took back a burden of wheat with him to Narberth, and
sowed three crofts, all of which sprang up abundantly.

When harvest time came, he went to look at his first croft, and found it
ripe. I will reap this to-morrow, he said. But in the morning he found
nothing but the bare straw. very ear had been taken away.

So he went to the net croft, which was also ripe. But, when he came to
cut it, he found it had been stripped like the first. Then he knew that
whoever had wasted Dyfed, and carried off hiannon and ryderi, was also
at work upon his wheat.

The third croft was also ripe, and over this one he determined to keep
watch. In the evening he armed himself and waited. At midnight he heard
a great tumult, and, looking out, saw a host of mice coming. ach mouse
bit off an ear of wheat and ran off with it. e rushed among them, but
could only catch one, which was more sluggish than the rest. This one he
put into his glove, and took it back, and showed it to icva.

To-morrow I will hang it, he said. It is not a fit thing for a man of
your dignity to hang a mouse, she replied. Nevertheless will I do so,
said he. Do so then, said icva.

The net morning, Manawyddan went to the magic mound, and set up two
forks on it, to make a gallows. e had ust finished, when a man dressed
like a poor scholar came towards him, and greeted him.

What are you doing, ord? he said.

I am going to hang a thief, replied Manawyddan.

What sort of a thief? I see an animal like a mouse in your hand, but a
man of rank like yours should not touch so mean a creature. et it go
free.

I caught it robbing me, replied Manawyddan, and it shall die a
thiefs death.

I do not care to see a man like you doing such a thing, said the
scholar. I will give you a pound to let it go.

I will not let it go, replied Manawyddan, nor will I sell it.

As you will, ord. It is nothing to me, returned the scholar. And he
went away.

Manawyddan laid a cross-bar along the forks. As he did so, another man
came by, a priest riding on a horse. e asked Manawyddan what he was
doing, and was told. My lord, he said, such a reptile is worth
nothing to buy, but rather than see you degrade yourself by touching it,
I will give you three pounds to let it go.

I will take no money for it, replied Manawyddan. It shall be hanged.

et it be hanged, said the priest, and went his way.

Manawyddan put the noose round the mouses neck, and was ust going to
draw it up, when he saw a bishop coming, with his whole retinue.

Thy blessing, ord Bishop, he said.

eavens blessing upon you, said the bishop. What are you doing?

I am hanging a thief, replied Manawyddan. This mouse has robbed me.

Since I happen to have come at its doom, I will ransom it, said the
bishop. ere are seven pounds. Take them, and let it go.

I will not let it go, replied Manawyddan.

I will give you twenty-four pounds of ready money if you will let it
go, said the bishop.

I would not, for as much again, replied Manawyddan.

If you will not free it for that, said the bishop, I will give you
all my horses and their baggage to let it go.

I will not, replied Manawyddan.

Then name your own price, said the bishop.

That offer I accept, replied Manawyddan. My price is that hiannon
and ryderi be set free.

They shall be set free, replied the bishop.

Still I will not let the mouse go, said Manawyddan.

What more do you ask? eclaimed the bishop.

That the charm be removed from Dyfed, replied Manawyddan.

It shall be removed, promised the bishop. So set the mouse free.

I will not, said Manawyddan, till I know who the mouse is.

She is my wife, replied the bishop, and I am called lwyd, the son of
ilcoed, and I cast the charm over Dyfed, and upon hiannon and ryderi,
to avenge wawl son of ld for the game of badger in the bag which
was played on him by wyll, ead of Annwn. It was my household that came
in the guise of mice and took away your corn. But since my wife has been
caught, I will restore hiannon and ryderi and take the charm off Dyfed
if you will let her go.

I will not let her go, said Manawyddan, until you have promised that
there shall be no charm put upon Dyfed again.

I will promise that also, replied lwyd. So let her go.

I will not let her go, said Manawyddan, unless you swear to take no
revenge for this hereafter.

ou have done wisely to claim that, replied lwyd. Much trouble would
else have come upon your head because of this. Now I swear it. So set my
wife free.

I will not, said Manawyddan, until I see hiannon and ryderi.

Then he saw them coming towards him; and they greeted one another.

Now set my wife free, said the bishop.

I will, gladly, replied Manawyddan. So he released the mouse, and
lwyd struck her with a wand, and turned her into a young woman, the
fairest ever seen.

And when Manawyddan looked round him, he saw Dyfed tilled and cultivated
again, as it had formerly been.

The powers of light had, this time, the victory. ittle by little, they
increased their mastery over the dominion of darkness, until we find the
survivors of the families of lyr and wyll mere vassals of Arthur.

-----

Footnote :

  etold from ady uests translation of the Mabinogi of Manawyddan,
  the Son of lyr.

Footnote :

  Saon Britainngland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               AT 

                  T ITOIS OF IT O DANSS


The powers of light were, however, by no means invariably successful in
their struggles with the powers of darkness. ven wydion son of Dn had
to serve his apprenticeship to misfortune. Assailing aer
Sidiades under one of its many titles,he was caught by wyll and
ryderi, and endured a long imprisonment. The sufferings he
underwent made him a bardan ancient eltic idea which one can still see
surviving in the popular tradition that whoever dares to spend a night
alone either upon the chair of the iant Idris the summit of ader
Idris, in Merionethshire, or under the haunted Black Stone of Arddu,
upon the lanberis side of Snowdon, will be found in the morning either
inspired or mad. ow he escaped we are not told; but the episode
does not seem to have quenched his ardour against the natural enemies of
his kind.

elped by his brother, Amaethon, god of agriculture, and his son, leu,
he fought the Battle of odeu, or the Trees, an eploit which is not
the least curious of eltic myths. It is known also as the Battle of
Achren, or Ochren, a name for ades of unknown meaning, but appearing
again in the remarkable Welsh poem which describes the Spoiling of
Annwn by Arthur. The ing of Achren was Arawn; and he was helped by
Brn, who apparently had not then made his fatal ourney to Ireland. The
war was made to secure three boons for manthe dog, the deer, and the
lapwing, all of them creatures for some reason sacred to the gods of the
nether world.

wydion was this time not alone, as he apparently was when he made his
first unfortunate reconnaissance of ades. Besides his brother and his
son, he had an army which he raised for the purpose. For a leader of
wydions magical attainments there was no need of standing troops. e
could call battalions into being with a charm, and dismiss them when
they were no longer needed. The name of the battle shows what he did on
this occasion; and the bard Taliesin adds his testimony:

      I have been in the battle of odeu, with leu and wydion,
       They changed the forms of the elementary trees and sedges.

In a poem devoted to it he describes in detail what happened. The
trees and grasses, he tells us, hurried to the fight: the alders led the
van, but the willows and the quickens came late, and the birch, though
courageous, took long in arraying himself; the elm stood firm in the
centre of the battle, and would not yield a foot; heaven and earth
trembled before the advance of the oak-tree, that stout door-keeper
against an enemy; the heroic holly and the hawthorn defended themselves
with their spikes; the heather kept off the enemy on every side, and the
broom was well to the front, but the fern was plundered, and the furze
did not do well; the stout, lofty pine, the intruding pear-tree, the
gloomy ash, the bashful chestnut-tree, the prosperous beech, the
long-enduring poplar, the scarce plum-tree, the shelter-seeking privet
and woodbine, the wild, foreign laburnum; the bean, bearing in its
shade an army of phantoms; rose-bush, raspberry, ivy, cherry-tree, and
medlarall took their parts.

In the ranks of ades there were equally strange fighters. We are told
of a hundred-headed beast, carrying a formidable battalion under the
root of its tongue and another in the back of its head; there was a
gaping black toad with a hundred claws; and a crested snake of many
colours, within whose flesh a hundred souls were tormented for their
sinsin fact, it would need a Dor or a Dante to do ustice to this
weird battle between the arrayed magics of heaven and hell.

It was magic that decided its fate. There was a fighter in the ranks of
ades who could not be overcome unless his antagonist guessed his namea
peculiarity of the terrene gods, remarks rofessor hys, which has
been preserved in our popular fairy tales. wydion guessed the name, and
sang these two verses:

          Sure-hoofed is my steed impelled by the spur;
           The high sprigs of alder are on thy shield;
           Brn art thou called, of the glittering branches!

          Sure-hoofed is my steed in the day of battle:
           The high sprigs of alder are on thy hand:
           Brn ... by the branch thou bearest
           as Amaethon the ood prevailed!

Thus the power of the dark gods was broken, and the sons of Dn retained
for the use of men the deer, the dog, and the lapwing, stolen from that
underworld, whence all good gifts came.

It was always to obtain some practical benefit that the gods of light
fought against the gods of darkness. The last and greatest of wydions
raids upon ades was undertaken to procurepork!

wydion had heard that there had come to Dyfed some strange beasts, such
as had never been seen before. They were called pigs or swine, and
Arawn, ing of Annwn, had sent them as a gift to ryderi son of wyll.
They were small animals, and their flesh was said to be better than the
flesh of oen. e thought it would be a good thing to get them, either
by force or fraud, from the dark powers. Mth son of Mthonwy, who ruled
the children of Dn from his Olympus of aer Dathyl, gave his
consent, and wydion set off, with eleven others, to ryderis
palace. They disguised themselves as bards, so as to be received by
ryderi, and wydion, who was the best teller of tales in the world,
entertained the rince of Dyfed and his court more than they had ever
been entertained by any story-teller before. Then he asked ryderi to
grant him a boonthe animals which had come from Annwn. But ryderi had
pledged his word to Arawn that he would neither sell nor give away any
of the new creatures until they had increased to double their number,
and he told the disguised wydion so.

ord, said wydion, I can set you free from your promise. Neither
give me the swine at once, nor yet refuse them to me altogether, and
to-morrow I will show you how.

e went to the lodging ryderi had assigned him, and began to work his
charms and illusions. Out of fungus he made twelve gilded shields, and
twelve horses with gold harness, and twelve black greyhounds with white
breasts, each wearing a golden collar and leash. And these he showed to
ryderi.

ord, said he, there is a release from the word you spoke last
evening concerning the swinethat you may neither give them nor sell
them. ou may echange them for something which is better. I will give
you these twelve horses with their gold harness, and these twelve
greyhounds with their gold collars and leashes, and these twelve gilded
shields for them.

ryderi took counsel with his men, and agreed to the bargain. So wydion
and his followers took the swine and went away with them, hurrying as
fast as they could, for wydion knew that the illusion would not last
longer than a day. The memory of their ourney was long kept up; every
place where they rested between Dyfed and aer Dathyl is remembered by a
name connecting it with pigs. There is a Mochdrev Swines Town in
each of the three counties of ardiganshire, Montgomeryshire, and
Denbighshire, and a astell y Moch Swines astle near Mochnant
Swines Brook, which runs through part of the two latter counties.
They shut up the pigs in safety, and then assembled all Mths army; for
the horses and hounds and shields had returned to fungus, and ryderi,
who guessed wydions part in it, was coming northward in hot haste.

There were two battlesone at Maenor enardd, near onway, and the other
at Maenor Alun, now called oed elen, near aernarvon. Beaten in both,
ryderi fell back upon Nant all, about nine miles from aernarvon. ere
he was again defeated with great slaughter, and sent hostages, asking
for peace and a safe retreat.

This was granted by Mth; but, none the less, the army of the sons of
Dn insisted on following the retreating host, and harassing it. So
ryderi sent a complaint to Mth, demanding that, if there must still be
war, wydion, who had caused all the trouble, should fight with him in
single combat.

wydion agreed, and the champions of light and darkness met face to
face. But ryderi was the waning power, and he fell before the strength
and magic of wydion. And at Maen Tyriawc, above Melenryd, was he
buried, and there is his grave, says the Mabinogi, though the ancient
Welsh poem, called the erses of the raves of the Warriors,
assigns him a different resting-place.

This decisive victory over ades and its kings was the end of the
struggle, until it was renewed, with still more complete success, by one
greater than wydionthe invincible Arthur.

-----

Footnote :

  Or the eltic lysium, a mythical country beneath the waves of the
  sea.

Footnote :

  See the Spoiling of Annwn, quoted in chap. IThe Mythological
  oming of Arthur.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, pp. -.

Footnote :

  Book of Taliesin III, ol. I, p. , of Skene. I have followed
  Skenes translation, with the especial eception of the curious line
  referring to the bean, so translated in D. W. Nashs Taliesin. If a
  correct rendering of the Welsh original, it offers an interesting
  parallel to certain superstitions of the reeks concerning this
  vegetable.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, note to p. .

Footnote :

  ady uests translation in her notes to ulhwch and Olwen.

Footnote :

  The following episode is retold from ady uests translation of the
  Mabinogi of Mth, Son of Mathonwy.

Footnote :

  Now called en y aer. It is on the summit of a hill half-way between
  lanrwst and onway, and about a mile from the station of lanbedr.

Footnote :

  Said to have been at huddlan Teivi, which is, perhaps, lan Teivy,
  near ardigan Bridge.

Footnote :

  oem I in the Black Book of aermarthen, ol. I, p. , of Skene.

Footnote :

                In Aber wenoli is the grave of ryderi,
                Where the waves beat against the land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT I

                  T MTOOIA OMIN OF AT


The oming of Arthur, his sudden rise into prominence, is one of the
many problems of the eltic mythology. e is not mentioned in any of the
Four Branches of the Mabinogi, which deal with the races of British gods
equivalent to the aelic Tuatha D Danann. The earliest references to
him in Welsh literature seem to treat him as merely a warrior-chieftain,
no better, if no worse, than several others, such as eraint, a
tributary prince of Devon, immortalized both by the bards and by
Tennyson. Then, following upon this, we find him lifted to the
etraordinary position of a king of gods, to whom the old divine
families of Dn, of lyr, and of wyll pay unquestioned homage. Triads
tell us that luddthe eus of the older antheonwas one of Arthurs
Three hief War-nights, and Arawn, ing of ades, one of his Three
hief ounselling nights. In the story called the Dream of honabwy,
in the ed Book of ergest, he is shown as a leader to whom are subect
those we know to have been of divine racesons of Nudd, of lyr, of
Brn, of ovannan, and of Arianrod. In another ed Book tale, that of
ulhwch and Olwen, even greater gods are his vassals. Amaethon son of
Dn, ploughs for him, and ovannan son of Dn, rids the iron, while two
other sons of Beli, Nynniaw and eibaw, turned into oen on account of
their sins, toil at the yoke, that a mountain may be cleared and tilled
and the harvest reaped in one day. e assembles his champions to seek
the treasures of Britain; and Manawyddan son of lyr, wyn son of
Nudd, and ryderi son of wyll rally round him at his call.

The most probable, and only adequate eplanation, is given by rofessor
hys, who considers that the fames of two separate Arthurs have been
accidentally confused, to the eceeding renown of a composite,
half-real, half-mythical personage into whom the two blended. One
of these was a divine Arthur, a god more or less widely worshipped in
the eltic worldthe same, no doubt, whom an e voto inscription found
in south-eastern France calls Mercurius Artaius. The other was a
human Arthur, who held among the Britons the post which, under oman
domination, had been called omes Britanni. This ount of Britain
was the supreme military authority; he had a roving commission to defend
the country against foreign invasion; and under his orders were two
slightly subordinate officers, the Du Britanniarum Duke of the
Britains, who had charge of the northern wall, and the omes ittoris
Saonici ount of the Saon Shore, who guarded the south-eastern
coasts. The Britons, after the departure of the omans, long kept intact
the organization their conquerors had built up; and it seems reasonable
to believe that this post of leader in war was the same which early
Welsh literature describes as that of emperor, a title given to Arthur
alone among the British heroes. The fame of Arthur the mperor
blended with that of Arthur the od, so that it became conterminous with
the area over which we have traced Brythonic settlement in reat
Britain. ence the many disputes, ably, if unprofitably, conducted,
over Arthurian localities and the sites of such cities as amelot, and
of Arthurs twelve great battles. istorical elements doubtless coloured
the tales of Arthur and his companions, but they are none the less as
essentially mythic as those told of their aelic analoguesthe ed
Branch eroes of lster and the Fenians.

Of those two cycles, it is with the latter that the Arthurian legend
shows most affinity. Arthurs position as supreme war-leader of
Britain curiously parallels that of Finns as general of a native Irish
militia. is ound Table of warriors also reminds one of Finns
Fenians sworn to adventure. Both alike battle with human and superhuman
foes. Both alike harry urope, even to the walls of ome. The love-story
of Arthur, his wife wynhwyvar uinevere, and his nephew Medrawt
Mordred, resembles in several ways that of Finn, his wife rainne, and
his nephew Diarmait. In the stories of the last battles of Arthur and of
the Fenians, the essence of the kindred myth still subsists, though the
actual eponents of it slightly differ. At the fight of amlan, it was
Arthur and Medrawt themselves who fought the final duel. But in the last
stand of the Fenians at abhra, the original protagonists have given
place to their descendants and representatives. Both Finn and ormac
were already dead. It is Oscar, Finns grandson, and airbr, ormacs
son, who fight and slay each other. And again, ust as Arthur was
thought by many not to have really died, but to have passed to the
island valley of Avilion, so a Scottish legend tells us how, ages after
the Fenians, a man, landing by chance upon a mysterious western island,
met and spoke with Finn mac oul. ven the alternative legend, which
makes Arthur and his warriors wait under the earth in a magic sleep for
the return of their triumph, is also told of the Fenians.

But these parallels, though they illustrate Arthurs pre-eminence, do
not show his real place among the gods. To determine this, we must
eamine the ranks of the older dynasties carefully, to see if any are
missing whose attributes this new-comer may have inherited. We find
ludd and wyn, Arawn, ryderi, and Manawyddan side by side with him
under their own names. Among the children of Dn are Amaethon and
ovannan. But here the list stops, with a notable omission. There is no
mention, in later myth, of wydion. That greatest of the sons of Dn has
fallen out, and vanished without a sign.

Singularly enough, too, the same stories that were once told of wydion
are now attached to the name of Arthur. So that we may assume, with
rofessor hys, that Arthur, the prominent god of a new antheon, has
taken the place of wydion in the old. A comparison of
wydion-myths and Arthur-myths shows an almost eact correspondence in
everything but name.

ike wydion, Arthur is the eponent of culture and of arts. Therefore
we see him carrying on the same war against the underworld for wealth
and wisdom that wydion and the sons of Dn waged against the sons of
lyr, the Sea, and of wyll, the ead of ades.

ike wydion, too, Arthur suffered early reverses. e failed, indeed,
even where his prototype had succeeded. wydion, we know from the
Mabinogi of Mth, successfully stole ryderis pigs, but Arthur was
utterly baffled in his attempt to capture the swine of a similar prince
of the underworld, called March son of Meirchion. Also as with
wydion, his earliest reconnaissance of ades was disastrous, and led to
his capture and imprisonment. Manawyddan son of lyr, confined him in
the mysterious and gruesome bone-fortress of Oeth and Anoeth, and there
he languished for three days and three nights before a rescuer came in
the person of oreu, his cousin. But, in the end, he triumphed. A
Welsh poem, ascribed to the bard Taliesin, relates, under the title The
Spoiling of Annwn, an epedition of Arthur and his followers into
the very heart of that country, from which he appears to have returned
for the verses are somewhat obscure with the loss of almost all his
men, but in possession of the obect of his questthe magic cauldron of
inspiration and poetry.

Taliesin tells the story as an eye-witness. e may well have done so;
for it was his boast that from the creation of the world he had allowed
himself to miss no event of importance. e was in eaven, he tells
us, when ucifer fell, and in the ourt of Dn before wydion was
born; he had been among the constellations both with Mary Magdalene and
with the pagan goddess Arianrod; he carried a banner before Aleander,
and was chief director of the building of the Tower of Babel; he saw the
fall of Troy and the founding of ome; he was with Noah in the Ark, and
he witnessed the destruction of Sodom and omorrah; and he was present
both at the Manger of Bethlehem and at the ross of alvary. But,
unfortunately, Taliesin, as a credible personage, rests under eactly
the same disabilities as Arthur himself. It is not denied by scholars
that there was a real Taliesin, a sith-century bard to whom were
attributed, and who may have actually composed, some of the poems in the
Book of Taliesin. But there was also another Taliesin, whom, as a
mythical poet of the British elts, rofessor hys is inclined to equate
with the aelic Ossian. The traditions of the two mingled, endowing
the historic Taliesin with the god-like attributes of his predecessor,
and clothing the mythical Taliesin with some of the actuality of his
successor.

It is regrettable that our bard did not at times sing a little less
incoherently, for his poem contains the fullest description that has
come down to us of the other world as the Britons conceived it.
Apparently the numerous names, all different and some now
untranslatable, refer to the same place, and they must be collated to
form a right idea of what Annwn was like. With the eception of an
obviously spurious last verse, here omitted, the poem is magnificently
pagan, and quite a storehouse of British mythology.

 I will praise the Sovereign, supreme ord of the land,
  Who hath etended his dominion over the shore of the world.
  Stout was the prison of weir, in aer Sidi,
  Through the spite of wyll and ryderi:
  No one before him went into it.
  The heavy blue chain firmly held the youth,
  And before the spoils of Annwn woefully he sang,
  And thenceforth till doom he shall remain a bard.
  Thrice enough to fill rydwen we went into it;
  cept seven, none returned from aer Sidi.

 Am I not a candidate for fame, to be heard in song
  In aer edryvan, four times revolving?
  The first word from the cauldron, when was it spoken?
  By the breath of nine maidens it was gently warmed.
  Is it not the cauldron of the chief of Annwn? What is its fashion?
  A rim of pearls is round its edge.
  It will not cook the food of a coward or one forsworn.
  A sword flashing bright will be raised to him,
  And left in the hand of leminawg.
  And before the door of the gate of ffern the lamp was burning.
  When we went with Arthura splendid labour!
  cept seven, none returned from aer edwyd.

 Am I not a candidate for fame, to be heard in song
  In aer edryvan, in the Isle of the Strong Door,
  Where twilight and pitchy darkness meet together,
  And bright wine is the drink of the host?
  Thrice enough to fill rydwen we went on the sea.
  cept seven, none returned from aer igor.

 I will not allow much praise to the leaders of literature.
  Beyond aer Wydyr they saw not the prowess of Arthur;
  Three-score hundreds stood on the walls;
  It was hard to converse with their watchman.
  Thrice enough to fill rydwen we went with Arthur;
  cept seven, none returned from aer olud.

 I will not allow much praise to the spiritless.
  They know not on what day, or who caused it,
  Or in what hour of the serene day wy was born,
  Or who caused that he should not go to the dales of Devwy.
  They know not the brindled o with the broad head-band,
  Whose yoke is seven-score handbreadths.
  When we went with Arthur, of mournful memory,
  cept seven, none returned from aer andwy.

 I will not allow much praise to those of drooping courage.
  They know not on what day the chief arose,
  Nor in what hour of the serene day the owner was born,
  Nor what animal they keep, with its head of silver.
  When we went with Arthur, of anious striving,
  cept seven, none returned from aer Ochren.

Many of the allusions of this poem will perhaps never be eplained. We
know no better than the leaders of literature whom the vainglorious
Taliesin taunted with their ignorance and lack of spirit in what hour
wy was born, or even who he was, much less who prevented him from going
to the dales of Devwy, wherever they may have been. We are in the dark
as much as they were with regard to the significance of the brindled o
with the broad head-band, and of the other animal with the silver
head. But the earlier portion of the poem is, fortunately, clearer,
and it gives glimpses of a grandeur of savage imagination. The
strong-doored, foursquare fortress of glass, manned by its dumb, ghostly
sentinels, spun round in never-ceasing revolution, so that few could
find its entrance; it was pitch-dark save for the twilight made by the
lamp burning before its circling gate; feasting went on there, and
revelry, and in its centre, choicest of its many riches, was the
pearl-rimmed cauldron of poetry and inspiration, kept bubbling by the
breaths of nine British pythonesses, so that it might give forth its
oracles. To this scanty information we may add a few lines, also by
Taliesin, and contained in a poem called A Song oncerning the Sons of
lyr ab Brochwel owys:

            erfect is my chair in aer Sidi:
             lague and age hurt not him whos in it
             They know, Manawyddan and ryderi.
             Three organs round a fire sing before it,
             And about its points are oceans streams
             And the abundant well above it
             Sweeter than white wine the drink in it.

ittle is, however, added by it to our knowledge. It reminds us that
Annwn was surrounded by the seathe heavy blue chain which held weir
so firmly;it informs us that the bright wine which was the drink of
the host was kept in a well; it adds to the revelry the singing of the
three organs; it makes a point that its inhabitants were freed from age
and death; and, last of all, it shows us, as we might have epected, the
ubiquitous Taliesin as a privileged resident of this delightful region.
We have two clues as to where the country may have been situated. undy
Island, off the coast of Devonshire, was anciently called nys Wair,
the Island of weir, or wydion. The Welsh translation of the Seint
real, an Anglo-Norman romance embodying much of the old mythology,
locates its Turning astleevidently the same as aer Sidiin the
district around and comprising uffin Island off the coast of
Anglesey. But these are slender threads by which to tether to firm
ground a realm of the imagination.

With wydion, too, have disappeared the whole of the characters
connected with him in that portion of the Mabinogi of Mth, Son of
Mathonwy, which recounts the myth of the birth of the sun-god. Neither
Mth himself, nor leu law yffes, nor Dylan, nor their mother,
Arianrod, play any more part; they have vanished as completely as
wydion. But the essence of the myth of which they were the figures
remains intact. wydion was the father by his sister Arianrod, wife of a
waning heaven-god called Nwyvre Space, of twin sons, leu, a god of
light, and Dylan, a god of darkness; and we find this same story woven
into the very innermost teture of the legend of Arthur. The new
Arianrod, though called Morgawse by Sir Thomas Malory, and Anna
by eoffrey of Monmouth, is known to earlier Welsh myth as
wyar. She was the sister of Arthur and the wife of the sky-god,
ludd, and her name, which means shed blood or gore, reminds us of
the relationship of the Morrg, the war-goddess of the aels, to the
heaven-god Nuada. The new leu law yffes is called walchmei,
that is, the Falcon of May, and the new Dylan is Medrawt, at once
Arthurs son and walchmeis brother, and the bitterest enemy of
both.

Besides these old friends with new faces, Arthur brings with him into
prominence a fresh antheon, most of whom also replace the older gods of
the heavens and earth and the regions under the earth. The eus of
Arthurs cycle is called Myrddin, who passed into the Norman-French
romances as Merlin. All the myths told of him bear witness to his high
estate. The first name of Britain, before it was inhabited, was, we
learn from a triad, las Myrddin, that is, Myrddins nclosure.
e is given a wife whose attributes recall those of the consorts of
Nuada and ludd. She is described as the only daughter of oelthe
British name of the aulish amulus, a god of war and the skyand was
called len wyddawg, that is, len, eader of osts. er memory is
still preserved in Wales in connection with ancient roadways; such names
as Ffordd len lens oad and Sarn len lens auseway
seem to show that the paths on which armies marched were ascribed or
dedicated to her. As Myrddins wife, she is credited with having
founded the town of armarthen aer Myrddin, as well as the highest
fortress in Arvon, which must have been the site near Beddgelert still
called Dinas mrys, the Town of mrys, one of Myrddins epithets or
names.

rofessor hys is inclined to credit Myrddin, or, rather, the British
eus under whatever name, with having been the god especially worshipped
at Stonehenge. ertainly this impressive temple, ever unroofed and
open to the sun and wind and rain of heaven, would seem peculiarly
appropriate to a British supreme god of light and sky. Neither are we
quite without documentary evidence which will allow us to connect it
with him. eoffrey of Monmouth, whose historical fictions usually
conceal mythological facts, relates that the stones which compose it
were erected by Merlin. Before that, they had stood in Ireland, upon a
hill which eoffrey calls Mount illaraus, and which can be identified
as the same spot known to Irish legend as the ill of isnech, and,
still earlier, connected with Balor. According to British tradition, the
primeval giants who first colonized Ireland had brought them from their
original home on the farthest coast of Africa, on account of their
miraculous virtues; for any water in which they were bathed became a
sovereign remedy either for sickness or for wounds. By the order of
Aurelius, a half-real, half-mythical king of Britain, Merlin brought
them thence to ngland, to be set up on Salisbury lain as a monument to
the British chieftains treacherously slain by engist and his Saons.
With this scrap of native information about Stonehenge we may compare
the only other piece we havethe account of the classic Diodorus, who
called it a temple of Apollo. At first, these two statements seem
to conflict. But it is far from unlikely that the earlier eltic
settlers in Britain made little or no religious distinction between sky
and sun. The sun-god, as a separate personage, seems to have been the
conception of a comparatively late age. eltic mythology allows us to be
present, as it were, at the births both of the aelic ugh amhfada and
the British leu law yffes.

ven the well-known story of Myrddins, or Merlins final imprisonment
in a tomb of airy enchantmenta tour withouten walles, or withoute eny
closurereads marvellously like a myth of the sun with all his fires
and travelling glories round him. ncircled, shielded, and made
splendid by his atmosphere of living light, the ord of eaven moves
slowly towards the west, to disappear at last into the sea as one local
version of the myth puts it, or on to a far-off island as another
says, or into a dark forest the choice of a third. When the myth
became finally fied, it was Bardsey Island, off the etreme westernmost
point of aernarvonshire, that was selected as his last abode. Into it
he went with nine attendant bards, taking with him the Thirteen
Treasures of Britain, thenceforth lost to men. Bardsey Island no doubt
derives its name from this story; and what is probably an allusion to it
is found in a first-century reek writer called lutarch, who describes
a grammarian called Demetrius as having visited Britain, and brought
home an account of his travels. e mentioned several uninhabited and
sacred islands off our coasts which he said were named after gods and
heroes, but there was one especially in which ronos was imprisoned with
his attendant deities, and Briareus keeping watch over him as he slept;
for sleep was the bond forged for him. Doubtless this
disinherited deity, whom the reek, after his fashion, called ronos,
was the British heaven- and sun-god, after he had descended into the
prison of the west.

Among other new-comers is ai, who, as Sir ay the Seneschal, fills so
large a part in the later romances. urged of his worst offences, and
reduced to a surly butler to Arthur, he is but a shadow of the earlier
ai who murdered Arthurs son lacheu, and can only be acquitted,
through the obscurity of the poem that relates the incident, of having
also carried off, or having tried to carry off, Arthurs wife,
wynhwyvar. e is thought to have been a personification of
fire, upon the strength of a description given of him in the
mythical romance of ulhwch and Olwen. ery subtle, it says, was
ai. When it pleased him he could render himself as tall as the highest
tree in the forest. And he had another peculiarityso great was the heat
of his nature, that, when it rained hardest, whatever he carried
remained dry for a handbreadth above and a handbreadth below his hand;
and when his companions were coldest, it was to them as fuel with which
to light their fire.

Another personage who owes his prominence in the Arthurian story to his
importance in eltic myth was March son of Meirchion, whose swine Arthur
attempted to steal, as wydion had done those of ryderi. In the
romances, he has become the cowardly and treacherous Mark, king,
according to some stories, of ornwall, but according to others, of the
whole of Britain, and known to all as the husband of the Fair Isoult,
and the uncle of Sir Tristrem. But as a deformed deity of the
underworld he can be found in aelic as well as in British myth. e
cannot be considered as originally different from Morc, a king of the
Fomors at the time when from their lass astle they so fatally
oppressed the hildren of Nemed. The Fomors were distinguished by
their animal features, and March had the same peculiarity. When Sir
Thomas Malory relates how, to please Arthur and Sir auncelot, Sir
Dinadan made a song about Mark, which was the worst lay that ever
harper sang with harp or any other instruments, he does not tell
us wherein the sting of the lampoon lay. It no doubt reminded ing Mark
of the unpleasant fact that he hadnot like his hrygian counterpart,
asss buthorses ears. e was, in fact, a eltic Midas, a distinction
which he shared with one of the mythical kings of early Ireland.

Neither can we pass over rien, a deity of the underworld akin to, or
perhaps the same as, Brn. ike that son of lyr, he was at once a
god of battle and of minstrelsy; he was adored by the bards as
their patron; his badge was the raven bran, in Welsh;
while, to make his identification complete, there is an etant poem
which tells how rien, wounded, ordered his own head to be cut off by
his attendants. is wife was Modron, known as the mother of
Mabon, the sun-god to whom inscriptions eist as Maponos. Another of
the children of rien and Modron is Owain, which was perhaps only
another name for Mabon. Taliesin calls him chief of the glittering
west, and he is as certainly a sun-god as his father rien, lord
of the evening, was a ruler of the dark underworld.

It is by reason of the pre-eminence of Arthur that we find gathered
round him so many gods, all probably various tribal personifications of
the same few mythological ideas. The elts, both of the aelic and the
British branches, were split up into numerous petty tribes, each with
its own local deities embodying the same essential conceptions under
different names. There was the god of the underworld, gigantic in
figure, patron alike of warrior and minstrel, teacher of the arts of
eloquence and literature, and owner of boundless wealth, whom some of
the British tribes worshipped as Brn, others as rien, others as wyll,
or March, or Mth, or Arawn, or Ogyrvran. There was the lord of an
elysiumades in its aspect of a paradise of the departed rather than of
the primeval subterranean realm where all things originatedwhom the
Britons of Wales called wyn, or wynwas; the Britons of ornwall,
Melwas; and the Britons of Somerset, Avallon, or Avallach. nder this
last title, his realm is called nys Avallon, Avallons Island, or,
as we know the word, Avilion. It was said to be in the and of Summer,
which, in the earliest myth, signified ades; and it was only in later
days that the mystic Isle of Avilion became fied to earth as
lastonbury, and the lysian and of Summer as Somerset. There
was a mighty ruler of heaven, a god of battles, worshipped on high
places, in whose hands was the stern arbitrament of war; some knew him
as ludd, others as Myrddin, or as mrys. There was a gentler deity,
friendly to man, to help whom he fought or caoled the powers of the
underworld; wydion he was called, and Arthur. ast, perhaps, to be
imagined in concrete shape, there was a long-armed, sharp-speared
sun-god who aided the culture-god in his work, and was known as leu, or
walchmei, or Mabon, or Owain, or eredur, and no doubt by many another
name; and with him is usually found a brother representing not light,
but darkness. This epression of a single idea by different names may be
also observed in aelic myth, though not quite so clearly. In the
hurtling of clan against clan, many such divinities perished altogether
out of memory, or survived only as names, to make up, in Ireland, the
vast, shadowy population claiming to be Tuatha D Danann, and, in
Britain, the long list of Arthurs followers. Othersgods of stronger
communitieswould increase their fame as their worshippers increased
their territory, until, as happened in reece, the chief deities of many
tribes came together to form a national antheon.

We have already tried to eplain the oming of Arthur historically.
Mythologically, he came, as, according to eltic ideas, all things came
originally, from the underworld. is father is called ther
endragon. But ther endragon is for the word dragon is not
part of the name, but a title signifying war-leader ther Ben, that
is, Brn, under his name of the Wonderful ead, so that, in spite
of the legend which describes Arthur as having disinterred Brns head
on Tower ill, where it watched against invasion, because he thought it
beneath his dignity to keep Britain in any other way than by
valour, we must recognize the ing of ades as his father. This
being so, it would only be natural that he should take a wife from the
same eternal country, and we need not be surprised to find in
wynhwyvars father, Ogyrvran, a personage corresponding in all respects
to the eltic conception of the ruler of the underworld. e was of
gigantic size; he was the owner of a cauldron out of which three
Muses had been born; and he was the patron of the bards, who
deemed him to have been the originator of their art. More than this, his
very name, analysed into its original ocur vran, means the evil
bran, or raven, the bird of death.

But Welsh tradition credits Arthur with three wives, each of them called
wynhwyvar. This peculiar arrangement is probably due to the eltic love
of triads; and one may compare them with the three tains who pass
through the mythico-heroic story of ochaid Airem, tain, and Mider. Of
these three wynhwyvars, besides the wynhwyvar, daughter of
Ogyrvran, one was the daughter of wyrd went, of whom we know nothing
but the name, and the other of wyrthur ap reidawl, the same ictor
son of Scorcher with whom wyn son of Nudd, fought, in earlier myth,
perpetual battle for the possession of reudylad, daughter of the
sky-god ludd. This same eternal strife between the powers of light and
darkness for the possession of a symbolical damsel is waged again in the
Arthurian cycle; but it is no longer for reudylad that wyn contends,
but for wynhwyvar, and no longer with wyrthur, but with Arthur. It
would seem to have been a ornish form of the myth; for the dark god is
called Melwas, and not wynwas, or wyn, his name in Welsh.
Melwas lay in ambush for a whole year, and finally succeeded in carrying
off wynhwyvar to his palace in Avilion. But Arthur pursued, and
besieged that stronghold, ust as ochaid Airem had, in the aelic
version of the universal story, mined and sapped at Miders sdh of
Bri eith. Mythology, as well as history, repeats itself; and
Melwas was obliged to restore wynhwyvar to her rightful lord.

It is not Melwas, however, that in the best-known versions of the story
contends with Arthur for the love of wynhwyvar. The most widespread
early tradition makes Arthurs rival his nephew Medrawt. ere rofessor
hys traces a striking parallel between the British legend of Arthur,
wynhwyvar, and Medrawt, and the aelic story of Airem, tain, and
Mider. The two myths are practically counterparts; for the names of
all the three pairs agree in their essential meaning. Airem, like
Arthur, signifies the loughman, the divine institutor of
agriculture; tain, the Shining One, is a fit parallel to
wynhwyvar, the White Apparition; while Mider and Medrawt both
come from the same root, a word meaning to hit, either literally, or
else metaphorically, with the mind, in the sense of coming to a
decision. To attempt to eplain this myth is to raise the veed question
of the meaning of mythology. Is it day and dark that strive for dawn, or
summer and winter for the lovely spring, or does it shadow forth the
rescue of the grain that makes mans life from the devouring underworld
by the farmers wit? When this can be finally resolved, a multitude of
eltic myths will be eplained. verywhere arise the same combatants for
the stolen bride; one has the attributes of light, the other is a
champion of darkness.

ven in Sir Thomas Malorys version of the Arthurian story, taken by him
from French romances far removed from the original tradition, we find
the myth subsisting. Medrawts original place as the lover of Arthurs
queen had been taken in the romances by Sir auncelot, who, if he was
not some now undiscoverable eltic god, must have been an invention
of the Norman adapters. But the story which makes Medrawt Arthurs rival
has been preserved in the account of how Sir Mordred would have wedded
uinevere by force, as part of the rebellion which he made against his
king and uncle. This strife was eltic myth long before it became
part of the pseudo-history of early Britain. The triads tell us how
Arthur and Medrawt raided each others courts during the owners
absence. Medrawt went to elli Wic, in ornwall, ate and drank
everything he could find there, and insulted ueen wynhwyvar, in
revenge for which Arthur went to Medrawts court and killed man and
beast. Their struggle only ended with the Battle of amlan; and that
mythical combat, which chroniclers have striven to make historical, is
full of legendary detail. Tradition tells how Arthur and his antagonist
shared their forces three times during the fight, which caused it to be
known as one of the Three Frivolous Battles of Britain, the idea of
doing so being one of Britains Three riminal esolutions. Four alone
survived the fray: one, because he was so ugly that all shrank from him,
believing him to be a devil; another, whom no one touched because he was
so beautiful that they took him for an angel; a third, whose great
strength no one could resist; and Arthur himself, who, after revenging
the death of walchmei upon Medrawt, went to the island of Avilion to
heal him of his grievous wounds.

And thencefrom the lysium of the eltspopular belief has always been
that he will some day return. But ust as the gods of the aels are said
to dwell sometimes in the and of the iving, beyond the western wave,
and sometimes in the palace of a hollow hill, so Arthur is sometimes
thought to be in Avilion, and sometimes to be sitting with his champions
in a charmed sleep in some secret place, waiting for the trumpet to be
blown that shall call him forth to reconquer Britain. The legend is
found in the ildon ills; in the Snowdon district; at adbury, in
Somerset, the best authenticated amelot; in the ale of Neath, in South
Wales; as well as in other places. e slumbers, but he has not died. The
ancient Welsh poem called The erses of the raves of the
Warriors enumerates the last resting-places of most of the British
gods and demi-gods. The grave of wydion is in the marsh of Dinlleu,
the grave of ieu law yffes is under the protection of the sea with
which he was familiar, and where the wave makes a sullen sound is the
grave of Dylan; we know the graves of ryderi, of walchmei, of March,
of Mabon, even of the great Beli, but

            Not wise the thoughta grave for Arthur.

-----

Footnote :

  A poem in praise of eraint, the brave man from the region of
  Dyvnaint Devon ... the enemy of tyranny and oppression, is
  contained in both the Black Book of aermarthen and the ed Book of
  ergest. When eraint was born, open were the gates of heaven,
  begins its last verse. It is translated in ol. I of Skene, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, pp. -.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  It is worthy of remark that the fame of Arthur is widely spread; he
  is claimed alike as a prince in Brittany, ornwall, Wales,
  umberland, and the owlands of Scotland; that is to say, his fame
  is conterminous with the Brythonic race, and does not etend to the
  aels.hamberss ncyclopdia.

Footnote :

  For Arthurian and Fenian parallels see ampbells opular Tales of
  the West ighlands.

Footnote :

  See chap. I of hyss Arthurian egendArthur, istorical and
  Mythical.

Footnote :

  A triad in the engwrt MS. , translated by Skene. It was Trystan
  who was watching the swine for his uncle, while the swineherd went
  with a message to ssylt Iseult, and Arthur desired one pig by
  deceit or by theft, and could not get it.

Footnote :

  See note to chap. IIThe Treasures of Britain.

Footnote :

  Book of Taliesin, poem , Skene, ol. I, p. .

Footnote :

  In a probably very ancient poem embedded in the siteenth-century
  Welsh romance called Taliesin, included by ady uest in her
  Mabinogion.

Footnote :

  The eistence of a sith-century bard of this name, a contemporary of
  the heroic stage of British resistance to the ermanic invaders, is
  well attested. A number of poems are found in medival Welsh MSS.,
  chief among them the so-called Book of Taliesin, ascribed to this
  sith-century poet. Some of these are almost as old as any remains of
  Welsh poetry, and may go back to the early tenth or the ninth century;
  others are productions of the eleventh, twelfth, and even thirteenth
  centuries.Nutt: Notes to his  edition of ady uests
  Mabinogion.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  There can be little doubt but that the sith-century bard succeeded
  to the form and attributes of a far older, a prehistoric, a mythic
  singer.Nutt: Notes to Mabinogion.

Footnote :

  I have been obliged to collate four different translators to obtain an
  acceptable version of what Mr. T. Stephens, in his iterature of the
  ymri, calls one of the least intelligible of the mythological
  poems. My authorities have been Skene, Stephens, Nash, and hys.

Footnote :

  A form of the name wydion.

Footnote :

  The name of Arthurs ship.

Footnote :

  evolving astle.

Footnote :

  Four-cornered astle.

Footnote :

  The old lace.

Footnote :

  astle of evelry.

Footnote :

  ingly astle.

Footnote :

  lass astle.

Footnote :

  astle of iches.

Footnote :

  Meaning is unknown. See chap. IThe ods of the Britons.

Footnote :

  Meaning is unknown. See chap. The ictories of ight over
  Darkness.

Footnote :

  nless they should be the yellow and the brindled bull mentioned in
  the story of ulhwch and Olwen.

Footnote :

  Book of Taliesin, poem I. The translation is by hys: Arthurian
  egend, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibid., chap. I.

Footnote :

  Malorys Morte Darthur, Book II, chap. II.

Footnote :

  istoria Britonum, Book III, chap. .

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibid., pp. -.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  See hyss eposition of the mythological meaning of the ed Book
  romance of the Dream of Maen Wledig, in his ibbert ectures, pp.
  -.

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, pp. -.

Footnote :

  istoria Britonum, Book III, chaps. I-II.

Footnote :

  See chap. I and hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, pp. , .

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  lutarch: De Defectu Oraculorum.

Footnote :

  The Seint real, quoted by hys: Arthurian egend, pp. -.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  lton: Origins of nglish istory, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  The name March means horse.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur. Book , chap. II.

Footnote :

  alled abraid ongsech.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend. See chap. Irien and his ongeners.

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  ed Book of ergest, II. hys: Arthurian egend, pp. -.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  Ibid.

Footnote :

  The Death-song of Owain. Taliesin, I, Skene, ol. I, p. .

Footnote :

  Book of Taliesin, II. Skene, however, translates the word rendered
  evening by hys as cultivated plain.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  Both by Malory and eoffrey of Monmouth.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  See chap. IIIThe Wooing of Branwen and the Beheading of Brn.

Footnote :

  e is called Ogyrvran the iant.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, pp. -.

Footnote :

  hys: ectures on Welsh hilology, p. . But the derivation is
  only tentative, and an interesting alternative one is given, which
  equates him with the ersian Ahriman.

Footnote :

  The enumeration of Arthurs three wynhwyvars forms one of the Welsh
  triads.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe ods in ile.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, chap. IIArthur and Airem.

Footnote :

  In the mysterious ancelot, not found in Arthurian story before the
  Norman adaptations of it, rofessor hys is inclined to see a British
  sun-god, or solar hero. A number of interesting comparisons are drawn
  between him and the eredur and Owain of the later Mabinogion tales,
  as well as with the aelic uchulainn. See Studies in the Arthurian
  egend.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  The fullest list of translated triads is contained in the appendi to
  roberts Ancient aws of ambria, . Many are also given as an
  appendi in Skenes Four Ancient Books of Wales.

Footnote :

  Black Book of aermarthen I, ol. I, pp. - in Skene.

Footnote :

  This is rofessor hyss translation of the Welsh line, no doubt more
  strictly correct than the famous rendering: nknown is the grave of
  Arthur.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT II

                        T TASS OF BITAIN


It is in keeping with the mythological character of Arthur that the
early Welsh tales recorded of him are of a different nature from those
which swell the pseudo-histories of Nennius and of eoffrey of
Monmouth. We hear nothing of that subugation of the countries of
Western urope which fills so large a part in the two books of the
istoria Britonum which eoffrey has devoted to him. onqueror he
is, but his conquests are not in any land known to geographers. It is
against ades, and not against ome, that he achieves his highest
triumphs. This is the true history of ing Arthur, and we may read more
fragments and snatches of it in two prose-tales preserved in the ed
Book of ergest. Both these tales date, in the actual form in which they
have come down to us, from the twelfth century. But, in each of them,
the writer seems to be stretching out his hands to gather in the dying
traditions of a very remote past.

When a Welsh man-at-arms named honabwy lay down, one night, to sleep
upon a yellow calf-skin, the only furniture in a noisome hut, in which
he had taken shelter, that was comparatively free from vermin, he had
the vision which is related in the tale called The Dream of
honabwy. e thought that he was travelling with his companions
towards the Severn, when they heard a rushing noise behind them, and,
looking back, saw a gigantic rider upon a monstrous horse. So terrible
was the horsemans appearance that they all started to run from him. But
their running was of no avail, for every time the horse drew in its
breath, it sucked them back to its very chest, only, however, to fling
them forward as it breathed out again. In despair they fell down and
besought their pursuers mercy. e granted it, asked their names, and
told them, in return, his own. e was known as Iddawc the Agitator of
Britain; for it was he who, in his love of war, had purposely
precipitated the Battle of amlan. Arthur had sent him to reason with
Medrawt; but though Arthur had charged him with the fairest sayings he
could think of, Iddawc translated them into the harshest he could
devise. But he had done seven years penance, and had been forgiven, and
was now riding to Arthurs camp. Thither he insisted upon taking
honabwy and his companions.

Arthurs army was encamped for a mile around the ford of hyd y roes,
upon both sides of the road; and on a small flat island in the middle of
the river was the mperor himself, in converse with Bedwini the Bishop
and warthegyd, the son of aw. ike Ossian, when he came back to
Ireland after his three hundred years soourn in the and of
romise, Arthur marvelled at the puny size of the people whom
Iddawc had brought for him to look at. And where, Iddawc, didst thou
find these little men? I found them, ord, up yonder on the road.
Then the mperor smiled. ord, said Iddawc, wherefore dost thou
laugh? Iddawc, replied Arthur, I laugh not; but it pitieth me that
men of such stature as these should have this island in their keeping,
after the men that guarded it of yore. Then he turned away, and Iddawc
told honabwy and his companions to keep silent, and they would see what
they would see.

The scope of such a book as this allows no space to describe the persons
and equipments of the warriors who came riding down with their companies
to oin Arthur, as he made his great march to fight the Battle of Badon,
thought by some to be historical, and located at Bath. The reader who
turns to the tale itself will see what honabwy saw. Many of Arthurs
warriors he will know by name: aradawc the Strong-armed, who is here
called a son, not of Brn, but of lyr; March son of Meirchion, the
underworld king; ai, described as the fairest horseman in all Arthurs
court; walchmei, the son of wyar and of Arthur himself; Mabon, the
son of Modron; Trystan son of Tallwch, the lover of The Fair Isoult;
oreu, Arthurs cousin and his rescuer from Manawyddans bone-prison;
these, and many more, will pass before him, as they passed before
honabwy during the three days and three nights that he slept and
dreamed upon the calf-skin.

This story of the Dream of honabwy, elaborate as it is in all its
details, is yet, in substance, little more than a catalogue. The
intention of its unknown author seems to have been to draw a series of
pictures of what he considered to be the principal among Arthurs
followers. The other storythat of ulhwch and Olwenalso takes this
catalogue form, but the matters enumerated are of a different kind. It
is not so much a record of men as of things. Not the heroes of Britain,
but the treasures of Britain are its subect. One might compare it with
the aelic story of the adventures of the three sons of Tuirenn.

The Thirteen Treasures of Britain were famous in early legend. They
belonged to gods and heroes, and were current in our island till the end
of the divine age, when Merlin, fading out of the world, took them with
him into his airy tomb, never to be seen by mortal eyes again. According
to tradition, they consisted of a sword, a basket, a drinking-horn,
a chariot, a halter, a knife, a cauldron, a whetstone, a garment, a pan,
a platter, a chess-board, and a mantle, all possessed of not less
marvellous qualities than the apples, the pig-skin, the spear, the
horses and chariot, the pigs, the hound-whelp, and the cooking-spit
which the sons of Tuirenn obtained for ugh. It is these same
legendary treasures that reappear, no doubt, in the story of ulhwch
and Olwen. The number tallies, for there are thirteen of them. Some are
certainly, and others probably, identical with those of the other
tradition. That there should be discrepancies need cause no surprise,
for it is not unlikely that there were several different versions of
their legend. veryone had heard of the Thirteen Treasures of Britain.
Many, no doubt, disputed as to what they were. Others might ask whence
they came. The story of ulhwch and Olwen was composed to tell them.
They were won by Arthur and his mighty men.

ulhwch is the hero of the story and Olwen is its heroine, but
only, as it were, by courtesy. The pair provide a love-interest which,
as in the tales of all primitive people, is kept in the background. The
woman, in such romances, takes the place of the gold and gems in a
modern treasure-hunt story; she is won by overcoming eternal
obstacles, and not by any difficulty in obtaining her own consent. In
this romance, ulhwch was the son of a king who afterwards married
a widow with a grown-up daughter, whom his stepmother urged ulhwch to
marry. On his modestly replying that he was not yet of an age to wed,
she laid the destiny on him that he should never have a wife at all,
unless he could win Olwen, the daughter of a terrible father called
awthorn, hief of iants.

The hief of iants was as hostile to suitors as he was monstrous in
shape; and no wonder! for he knew that on his daughters marriage his
own life would come to an end. Both in this peculiarity and in the
description of his ponderous eyebrows, which fell so heavily over his
eyes that he could not see until they had been lifted up with forks, he
reminds one of the Fomor, Balor. Of his daughter, on the other hand, the
Welsh tale gives a description as beautiful as Olwen was, herself. More
yellow was her head than the flower of the broom, and her skin was
whiter than the foam of the wave, and fairer were her hands and her
fingers than the blossoms of the wood anemone amidst the spray of the
meadow-fountain. The eye of the trained hawk, the glance of the
three-mewed falcon was not brighter than hers. er bosom was more snowy
than the breast of the white swan, her cheek was redder than the reddest
roses. Whoso beheld her was filled with her love. Four white trefoils
sprung up wherever she trod. And therefore was she called Olwen.

ulhwch had no need to see her to fall in love with her. e blushed at
her very name, and asked his father how he could obtain her in marriage.
is father reminded him that he was Arthurs cousin, and advised him to
claim Olwen from him as a boon.

So ulhwch pricked forth upon a steed with head dappled grey, of four
winters old, firm of limb, with shell-formed hoofs, having a bridle of
linked gold on his head, and upon him a saddle of costly gold. And in
the youths hand were two spears of silver, sharp, well-tempered, headed
with steel, three ells in length, of an edge to wound the wind, and
cause blood to flow, and swifter than the fall of the dewdrop from the
blade of reed-grass upon the earth when the dew of une is at the
heaviest. A gold-hilted sword was upon his thigh, the blade of which was
of gold, bearing a cross of inlaid gold of the hue of the lightning of
heaven; his war-horn was of ivory. Before him were two brindled
white-breasted greyhounds, having strong collars of rubies about their
necks, reaching from the shoulder to the ear. And the one that was on
the left side bounded across to the right side, and the one on the right
to the left, and like two sea-swallows sported around him. And his
courser cast up four sods with his four hoofs, like four swallows in the
air, about his head, now above, now below. About him was a four-cornered
cloth of purple, and an apple of gold was at each corner, and every one
of the apples was of the value of an hundred kine. And there was
precious gold of the value of three hundred kine upon his shoes, and
upon his stirrups, from his knee to the tip of his toe. And the blade of
grass bent not beneath him, so light was his coursers tread as he
ourneyed towards the gate of Arthurs palace.

Nor did this bold suitor stand greatly upon ceremony. e arrived after
the portal of the palace had been closed for the night, and, contrary to
all precedent, sent to Arthur demanding instant entry. Although, too, it
was the custom for visitors to dismount at the horse-block at the gate,
he did not do so, but rode his charger into the hall. After greetings
had passed between him and Arthur, and he had announced his name, he
demanded Olwen for his bride at the hands of the mperor and his
warriors.

Neither Arthur nor any of his court had ever heard of Olwen. owever, he
promised his cousin either to find her for him, or to prove that there
was no such person. e ordered his most skilful warriors to accompany
ulhwch; ai, with his companion Bedwyr, the swiftest of men; ynddelig,
who was as good a guide in a strange country as in his own; wrhyr, who
knew all the languages of men, as well as of all other creatures;
walchmei, who never left an adventure unachieved; and Menw, who could
render himself and his companions invisible at will.

They travelled until they came to a castle on an open plain. Feeding on
the plain was a countless herd of sheep, and, on a mound close by, a
monstrous shepherd with a monstrous dog. Menw cast a spell over the dog,
and they approached the shepherd. e was called ustennin, a brother of
awthorn, while his wife was a sister of ulhwchs own mother. The evil
chief of giants had reduced his brother to servitude, and murdered all
his twenty-four sons save one, who was kept hidden in a stone chest.
Therefore he welcomed ulhwch and the embassy from Arthur, and promised
to help them secretly, the more readily since ai offered to take the
one surviving son under his protection. ustennins wife procured
ulhwch a secret meeting with Olwen, and the damsel did not altogether
discourage her wooers suit.

The party started for awthorns castle. Without raising any alarm, they
slew the nine porters and the nine watch-dogs, and came unhindered into
the hall. They greeted the ponderous giant, and announced the reason of
their coming. Where are my pages and my servants? he said. aise up
the forks beneath my two eyebrows which have fallen over my eyes, so
that I may see the fashion of my son-in-law. e glared at them, and
told them to come again upon the net day.

They turned to go, and, as they did so, awthorn seized a poisoned dart,
and threw it after them. But Bedwyr caught it, and cast it back,
wounding the giants knee. They left him grumbling, slept at the house
of ustennin, and returned, the net morning.

Again they demanded Olwen from her father, threatening him with death if
he refused. er four great-grandmothers, and her four great-grandsires
are yet alive, replied awthorn; it is needful that I take counsel of
them. So they turned away, and, as they went, he flung a second dart,
which Menw caught, and hurled back, piercing the giants body.

The net time they came, awthorn warned them not to shoot at him again,
unless they desired death. Then he ordered his eyebrows to be lifted up,
and, as soon as he could see, he flung a poisoned dart straight at
ulhwch. But the suitor himself caught it, and flung it back, so that it
pierced awthorns eyeball and came out through the back of his head.
ere again we are reminded of the myth of ugh and Balor. awthorn,
however, was not killed, though he was very much discomforted. A cursed
ungentle son-in-law, truly! he complained. As long as I remain alive,
my eyesight will be the worse. Whenever I go against the wind, my eyes
will water; and peradventure my head will burn, and I shall have a
giddiness every new moon. ursed be the fire in which it was forged!
ike the bite of a mad dog is the stroke of this poisoned iron.

It was now the turn of ulhwch and his party to warn the giant that
there must be no more dart-throwing. e appeared, indeed, more amenable
to reason, and allowed himself to be placed opposite to ulhwch, in a
chair, to discuss the amount of his daughters bride-price.

Its terms, as he gradually unfolded them, were terrific. The blood-fine
paid for ian to ugh seems, indeed, a trifle beside it. To obtain
grain, for food and liquor at his daughters wedding, a vast hill which
he showed to ulhwch must be rooted up, levelled, ploughed, sown, and
harvested in one day. No one could do this ecept Amaethon son of Dn,
the divine husbandman, and ovannan son of Dn, the divine smith, and
they must have the service of three pairs of magic oen. e must also
have returned to him the same nine bushels of fla which he had sown in
his youth, and which had never come up; for only out of this very fla
should be made the white wimple for Olwens head. For mead, too, he must
have honey nine times sweeter than the honey of the virgin swarm.

Then followed the enumeration of the thirteen treasures to be paid to
him as dowry. Such a list of wedding presents was surely never known! No
pot could hold such honey as he demanded but the magic vessel of lwyr,
the son of lwyryon. There would not be enough food for all the
wedding-guests, unless he had the basket of wyddneu aranhir, from
which all the men in the world could be fed, thrice nine at a time. No
cauldron could cook the meat, ecept that of Diwrnach the ael. The
mystic drinking-horn of wlgawd ododin must be there, to give them
drink. The harp of Teirtu, which, like the Dagdas, played of itself,
must make music for them. The giant father-in-laws hair could only be
shorn with one instrumentthe tusk of White-tooth, ing of the Boars,
and not even by that unless it was plucked alive out of its owners
mouth. Also, before the hair could be cut, it must be spread out, and
this could not be done until it had been first softened with the blood
of the perfectly black sorceress, daughter of the perfectly white
sorceress, from the Source of the Stream of Sorrow, on the borders of
hell. Nor could the sorceresss blood be kept warm enough unless it was
placed in the bottles of wyddolwyn orr, which preserved the heat of
any liquor put into them, though it was carried from the east of the
world to the west. Another set of bottles he must also have to keep milk
for his guests inthose bottles of hinnon hin Barnawd in which no
drink ever turned sour. For himself, he required the sword of wrnach
the iant, which that personage would never allow out of his own
keeping, because it was destined that he himself should fall by it. ast
of all, he must be given the comb, the razor, and the scissors which lay
between the ears of Twrch Trwyth, a king changed into the most terrible
of wild boars.

It is the chase of this boar which gives the story of ulhwch and
Olwen its alternative titleThe Twrch Trwyth. The task was one worthy
of gods and demi-gods. Its contemplation might well have appalled
ulhwch, who, however, was not so easily frightened. To every fresh
demand, every new obstacle put in his way, he gave the same answer:

It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.

Whether it was easy or not will be seen from the conditions under which
alone the hunt could be brought to a successful end. No ordinary hounds
or huntsmen would avail. The chief of the pack must be Drudwyn, the
whelp of reid the son of ri, led in the one leash that would hold him,
fastened, by the one chain strong enough, to the one collar that would
contain his neck. No huntsman could hunt with this dog ecept Mabon son
of Modron; and he had, ages before, been taken from between his mother
and the wall when he was three nights old, and it was not known where he
was, or even whether he were living or dead. There was only one steed
that could carry Mabon, namely wynn Mygdwn, the horse of weddw. Two
other marvellous hounds, the cubs of ast hymhi, must also be obtained;
they must be held in the only leash they would not break, for it would
be made out of the beard of the giant Dissull, plucked from him while he
was still alive. ven with this, no huntsman could lead them ecept
ynedyr Wyllt, who was himself nine times more wild than the wildest
beast upon the mountains. All Arthurs mighty men must come to help,
even wyn son of Nudd, upon his black horse; and how could he be spared
from his terrible duty of restraining the devils in hell from breaking
loose and destroying the world?

ere is material for romance indeed! But, unhappily, we shall never know
the full story of how all these magic treasures were obtained, all these
magic hounds captured and compelled to hunt, all these magic huntsmen
brought to help. The storywhich Mr. Nutt considers to be, saving
the finest tales of the Arabian Nights, the greatest romantic fairy
tale the world has ever knownis not, as we have it now, complete. It
reads fully enough; but, on casting backwards and forwards, between the
list of feats to be performed and the body of the tale which is supposed
to relate them all, we find many of them wanting. The host of Arthur,
we are told, dispersed themselves into parties of one and two, each
party intent upon some separate quest. The adventures of some of them
have come down, but those of others have not. We are told how ai slew
wrnach the iant with his own sword; how wyrthur son of reidawl,
wyns rival for the love of reudylad, saved an anthill from fire, and
how the grateful ants searched for and found the very fla-seeds sown by
awthorn in his youth; how Arthurs host surrounded and took ast
hymhis cubs, and how ai and Bedwyr overcame Dissull, and plucked out
his beard with wooden tweezers, to make a leash for them. We learn how
Arthur went to Ireland, and brought back the cauldron of Diwrnach the
ael, full of Irish money; how White-tusk the Boar-king was chased and
killed; and how Arthur condescended to slay the perfectly black
sorceress with his own hand. That others of the treasures were acquired
is hinted rather than said. Most important of all for so much depended
on him, we find out where the stolen Mabon was, and learn how he was
rescued.

So many ages had elapsed since Mabon had disappeared that there seemed
little hope of ever finding news of him. Nevertheless wrhyr, who spoke
the languages of all creatures, went to enquire of that ancient bird,
the Ousel of ilgwri. But the Ousel, though in her time she had pecked a
smiths anvil down to the size of a nut, was yet too young to have heard
of Mabon. She sent wrhyr to a creature formed before her, the Stag of
edynvre. But though the Stag had lived to see an oak-sapling slowly
grow to be a tree with a thousand branches, and as slowly decay again
till it was a withered stump, he had never heard of Mabon.

Therefore he sent him on to a creature still older than himselfthe Owl
of wm awlwyd. The wood she lived in had been thrice rooted up, and had
thrice re-sown itself, and yet, in all that immense time, she had never
heard of Mabon. There was but one who might have, she told wrhyr, and
he was the agle of wern Abwy.

ere, at last, they struck Mabons trail. The agle said: I have been
here for a great space of time, and when I first came hither there was a
rock here, from the top of which I pecked at the stars every evening;
and now it is not so much as a span high. From that day to this I have
been here, and I have never heard of the man for whom you inquire,
ecept once when I went in search of food as far as lyn lyw. And when
I came there, I struck my talons into a salmon, thinking he would serve
me as food for a long time. But he drew me into the deep, and I was
scarcely able to escape from him. After that I went with my whole
kindred to attack him, and to try to destroy him, but he sent
messengers, and made peace with me; and came and besought me to take
fifty fish spears out of his back. nless he know something of him whom
you seek, I cannot tell who may. owever, I will guide you to the place
where he is.

It happened that the Salmon did know. With every tide he went up the
Severn as far as the walls of loucester, and there, he said, he had
found such wrong as he had never found anywhere else. So he took ai and
wrhyr upon his shoulders and carried them to the wall of the prison
where a captive was heard lamenting. This was Mabon son of Modron, who
was suffering such imprisonment as not even ludd of the Silver and or
reid, the son of ri, the other two of the Three aramount
risoners of Britain, had endured before him. But it came to an end
now; for ai sent to Arthur, and he and his warriors stormed loucester,
and brought Mabon away.

All was at last ready for the final achievementthe hunting of Twrch
Trwyth, who was now, with his seven young pigs, in Ireland. Before he
was roused, it was thought wise to send the wizard Menw to find out by
ocular inspection whether the comb, the scissors, and the razor were
still between his ears. Menw took the form of a bird, and settled upon
the Boars head. e saw the coveted treasures, and tried to take one of
them, but Twrch Trwyth shook himself so violently that some of the venom
from his bristles spurted over Menw, who was never quite well again from
that day.

Then the hunt was up, the men surrounded him, and the dogs were loosed
at him from every side. On the first day, the Irish attacked him. On the
second day, Arthurs household encountered him and were worsted. Then
Arthur himself fought with him for nine days and nine nights without
even killing one of the little pigs.

A truce was now called, so that wrhyr, who spoke all languages, might
go and parley with him. wrhyr begged him to give up in peace the comb,
the scissors, and the razor, which were all that Arthur wanted. But the
Boar Trwyth, indignant of having been so annoyed, would not. On the
contrary, he promised to go on the morrow into Arthurs country, and do
all the harm he could there.

So Twrch Trwyth with his seven pigs crossed the sea into Wales, and
Arthur followed with his warriors in the ship rydwen. ere the story
becomes wonderfully realistic and circumstantial. We are told of every
place they passed through on the long chase through South Wales, and can
trace the course of the hunt over the map. We know of every check
the huntsmen had, and what happened every time the boars turned to bay.
The casualty-list of Arthurs men is completely given; and we can also
follow the shrinking of Twrch Trwyths herd, as his little pigs fell one
by one. None were left but Trwyth himself by the time the Severn estuary
was reached, at the mouth of the Wye.

ere the hunt came up with him, and drove him into the water, and in
this unfamiliar element he was outmatched. Osla Big-nife,
Manawyddan son of lyr, acmwri, the servant of Arthur, and wyngelli
caught him by his four feet and plunged his head under water, while the
two chief huntsmen, Mabon son of Modron, and yledyr Willt, came, one on
each side of him, and took the scissors and the razor. Before they could
get the comb, however, he shook himself free, and struck out for
ornwall, leaving Osla and acmwri half-drowned in the Severn.

And all this trouble, we are told, was mere play compared with the
trouble they had with him in ornwall before they could get the comb.
But, at last, they secured it, and drove the boar out over the deep sea.
e passed out of sight, with two of the magic hounds in pursuit of him,
and none of them have ever been heard of since.

The sight of these treasures, paraded before awthorn, chief of giants,
was, of course, his death-warrant. All who wished him ill came to gloat
over his downfall. But they should have been put to shame by the giant,
whose end had, at least, a certain dignity. My daughter, he said to
ulhwch, is yours, but you need not thank me for it, but Arthur, who
has accomplished all this. By my free will you should never have had
her, for with her I lose my life.

Thereupon they cut off his head, and put it upon a pole; and that night
the undutiful Olwen became ulhwchs bride.

-----

Footnote :

  istory of the Britons,  .

Footnote :

  eoffrey of Monmouth. Books I and , and chaps. I and II of I.

Footnote :

  Translated by ady uest in her Mabinogion.

Footnote :

  See chap. IFinn and the Fenians.

Footnote :

  hap. IIIThe aelic Argonauts.

Footnote :

  The list will be found, translated from an old Welsh MS., in the notes
  to ulhwch and Olwen, in ady uests Mabinogion.

Footnote :

  hap. IIIThe aelic Argonauts.

Footnote :

  ronounced eelhookh.

Footnote :

  The following pages sketch out the main incidents of the story as
  translated by ady uest in her Mabinogion.

Footnote :

  In Welsh, spaddaden enkawr.

Footnote :

  I.e. She of the White Track. The beauty of Olwen was proverbial in
  medival Welsh poetry.

Footnote :

  In his notes to his edition of ady uests Mabinogion. ublished
  .

Footnote :

  So says the tet. But a triad quoted by ady uest in her notes gives
  the Three aramount risoners of Britain differently. The three
  supreme prisoners of the Island of Britain, lyr lediath in the
  prison of uroswydd Wledig, and Madoc, or Mabon, and weir, son of
  weiryoth; and one more ealted than the three, and that was Arthur,
  who was for three nights in the astle of Oeth and Anoeth, and three
  nights in the prison of Wen endragon, and three nights in the dark
  prison under the stone. And one youth released him from these three
  prisons; that youth was oreu the son of ustennin, his cousin.

Footnote :

  See hys: eltic Folklore, chap. lace-name Stories.

Footnote :

  The big knife was, we are told in the story, a short broad dagger.
  When Arthur and his hosts came before a torrent, they would seek for a
  narrow place where they might pass the water, and would lay the
  sheathed dagger across the torrent, and it would form a bridge
  sufficient for the armies of the three islands of Britain, and of the
  three islands adacent, with their spoil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             AT III

                   T ODS AS IN ATS NITS


It is not, however, by such fragments of legend that Arthur is best
known to nglish readers. Not Arthur the god, but Arthur the blameless
king, who founded the Table ound, from which he sent forth his knights
to ride abroad redressing human wrongs, is the figure which the
name conures up. Nor is it even from Sir Thomas Malorys Morte Darthur
that this conception comes to most of us, but from Tennysons Idylls of
the ing. But Tennyson has so modernized the ancient tradition that it
retains little of the old Arthur but the name. e tells us himself that
his poem had but very slight relation to

                 ... that gray king, whose name, a ghost,
         Streams like a cloud, man-shaped, from mountain-peak,
         And cleaves to cairn and cromlech still; or him
         Of eoffreys book, or him of Malleors ...;

but that he merely used the legend to give a substantial form to his
ideal figure of the perfect nglish gentlemana title to which the
original Arthur could scarcely have laid claim. Still less does there
remain in it the least trace of anything that could suggest mythology.

As much as this, however, might be said of Malorys book. We may be
fairly certain that the good Sir Thomas had no idea that the personages
of whom he wrote had ever been anything different from the hristian
knights which they had become in the late French romances from which he
compiled his own fifteenth-century work. The old gods had been, from
time to time, very completely euhemerized. The characters of the Four
Branches of the Mabinogi are still recognizable as divine beings. In
the later Welsh stories, however, their divinity merely hangs about them
in shreds and tatters, and the first Norman adapters of these stories
made them still more definitely human. By the time Malory came to build
up his Morte Darthur from the foreign romances, they had altered so much
that the shapes and deeds of gods could only be recognized under their
medival knightly disguises by those who had known them in their ancient
forms.

We have chosen Malorys Morte Darthur, as almost the sole representative
of Arthurian literature later than the Welsh poems and prose stories,
for three reasons. Firstly, because it is the nglish Arthurian romance
par ecellence from which all later nglish authors, including
Tennyson, have drawn their material. Secondly, because the mass of
foreign literature dealing with the subect of Arthur is in itself a
life-study, and could not by any possibility be compressed within the
limits of a chapter. Thirdly, because Malorys fine udgment caused him
to choose the best and most typical foreign tales to weave into his own
romance; and hence it is that we find most of our old British godsboth
those of the earlier cycle and those of the system connected with
Arthurstriding disguised through his pages.

uriously enough, Sir dward Strachey, in his preface to the lobe
edition of atons Morte Darthur, uses almost the same image to
describe Malorys prose-poem that Matthew Arnold handled with such
effect, in his Study of eltic iterature, to point out the real
nature of the Mabinogion. Malory, he says, has built a great,
rambling, medival castle, the walls of which enclose rude and even
ruinous work of earlier times. ow rude and how ruinous these relics
were Malory doubtless had not the least idea, for he has completely
umbled the ancient mythology. Not only do gods of the older and newer
order appear together, but the same deities, under very often only
slightly varying names, come up again and again as totally different
characters.

Take, for eample, the ancient deity of death and ades. As ing
Brandegore, or Brandegoris Brn of ower, he brings five thousand
mounted men to oppose ing Arthur; but, as Sir Brandel, or
Brandiles Brn of wales, he is a valiant night of the ound
Table, who dies fighting in Arthurs service. Again, under his name
of ther endragon ther Ben, he is Arthurs father; though as
ing Ban of Benwyk the Square nclosure, doubtless the same as
Taliesins aer edryvan and Malorys arbonek, he is a foreign
monarch, who is Arthurs ally. et again, as the father of
uinevere, Ogyrvran has become eodegrance. As ing riens, or
rience, of ore ower, he marries one of Arthurs sisters,
fights against him, but finally tenders his submission, and is enrolled
among his knights. rien may also be identified in the Morte
Darthur as ing ience, or yons, of North Wales, and as ing
Nentres of arloth; while, to crown the varied disguises of this
roteus of British gods, he appears in an isolated episode as Balan, who
fights with his brother Balin until they kill one another.

One may generally tell the divinities of the underworld in these
romances by their connection, not with the settled and civilized parts
of ngland, but with the wild and remote north and west, and the still
wilder and remoter islands. ust as Brn and rien are kings of ower,
so Arawn, under the corruptions of his name into Anguish and
Anguissance, is made ing of Scotland or Ireland, both countries
having been probably confounded, as the same land of the Scotti, or
aels. wyll, ead of Annwn, we likewise discover under two
disguises. As elles, ing of the Foreign ountry and eeper of
the oly rail, he is a personage of great mythological significance,
albeit the real nature of him and his surroundings has been overlaid
with a hristian veneer as foreign to the original of elles as his own
kingdom was to Arthurs knights. The hief of ades figures as a cousin
nigh unto oseph of Arimathie, who, while he might ride supported
much hristendom, and holy church. e is represented as the father
of layne len, whom he gives in marriage to Sir auncelot,
bestowing upon the couple a residence called astle Bliant, the
name of which, there is good evidence to show, is connected with that of
wylls vassal called Teirnyon Twryf liant in the first of the
Mabinogi. nder his other name of Sir elleasthe hero of
Tennysons Idyll of elleas and ttarrethe primitive myth of wyll is
touched at a different point. After his unfortunate love-passage with
ttarre or ttard, as Malory calls her, elleas is represented as
marrying Nimue, whose original name, which was hiannon, reached
this form, as well as that of ivien, through a series of miscopyings
of successive scribes.

With elles, or elleas, is associated a ing ellean, or ellam, his
son, and, equally with him, the eeper of the rail, who can be no other
than ryderi. ike that deity in the Mabinogi of Mth, he is
defeated by one of the gods of light. The dealer of the blow, however,
is not Arthur, as successor to wydion, but Balin, the allo-British
sun-god Belinus.

Another dark deity, wyn son of Nudd, we discover under all of his three
titles. alled variously Sir winas, Sir uynas, and Sir
wenbaus by Malory, the Welsh wynwas or wyn is altogether on
Arthurs side. The ornish Melwas, split into two different knights,
divides his allegiance. As Sir Melias, or Meleaus, de ile
of the Isle, he is a night of the ound Table, though, on the
quarrel between Arthur and auncelot, he sides with the knight against
the king. But as Sir Meliagraunce, or Meliagaunce, it is he who, as in
the older myth, captures ueen uinevere and carries her off to his
castle. nder his Somerset name of Avallon, or Avallach, he is
connected with the episode of the rail. ing velake is a Saracen
ruler who was converted by oseph of Arimathea, and brought by him to
Britain. In his converts enthusiasm, he attempted the quest of the holy
vessel, but was not allowed to succeed. As a consolation, however,
it was divinely promised him that he should not die until he had seen a
knight of his blood in the ninth degree who should achieve it. This was
done by Sir ercivale, ing velake being then three hundred years
old.

Turning from deities of darkness to deities of light, we find the
sky-god figuring largely in the Morte Darthur. The ludd of the earlier
mythology is Malorys ing oth, or ot, of Orkney, through an
intrigue with whose wife Arthur becomes the father of Sir Mordred. ots
wife was the mother also of Sir awain, whose birth Malory does not,
however, attribute to Arthur, though such must have been the original
form of the myth. Sir awain, of the Arthurian legend, is the
walchmei of the Welsh stories, the successor of the still earlier leu
law yffes, ust as Sir Mordredthe Welsh Medrawtcorresponds to leus
brother Dylan. As Sir Mordred retains the dark character of Medrawt, so
Sir awain, even in Malory, shows the attributes of a solar deity.
We are told that his strength increased gradually from dawn till high
noon, and then as gradually decreased againa piece of pagan symbolism
which forms a good eample of the appositeness of Sir dward Stracheys
figure; for it stands out of the medival narrative like an ancient
brick in some more modern building.

The eus of the later cycle, mrys or Myrddin, appears in the Morte
Darthur under both his names. The word mrys becomes Bors, and ing
Bors of aul is made a brother of ing Ban of Benwyckthat is, Brn
of the Square nclosure, the ubiquitous underworld god. Myrddin we meet
under no such disguise. The ever-popular Merlin still retains intact the
attributes of the sky-god. e remains above, and apart from all the
knights, higher even in some respects than ing Arthur, to whom he
stands in much the same position as Mth does to wydion in the
Mabinogi. ike Mth, he is an enchanter, and, like Mth, too, who
could hear everything said in the world, in however low a tone, if only
the wind met it, he is practically omniscient. The account of his final
disappearance, as told in the Morte Darthur, is only a re-embellishment
of the original story, the nature-myth giving place to what novelists
call a feminine interest. veryone knows how the great magician fell
into a dotage upon the lady of the lake whom Malory calls Nimue, and
Tennyson ivienboth names being that of hiannon in disguise.
Merlin would let her have no rest, but always he would be with her ...
and she was ever passing weary of him, and fain would have been
delivered of him, for she was afeard of him because he was a devils
son, and she could not put him away by no means. And so on a time it
happed that Merlin showed to her in a rock whereas was a great wonder,
and wrought by enchantment, that went under a great stone. So, by her
subtle working, she made Merlin to go under that stone to let her wit of
the marvels there, but she wrought so there for him that he never came
out for all the craft that he could do. And so she departed and left
Merlin.

Merlins living grave is still to be seen at the end of the al des
Fes, in the forest of Brcilien, in Brittany. The tomb of stone is
certainly but a prosaic equivalent for the tower of woven air in which
the heaven-god went to his rest. Still, it is not quite so unpoetic as
the leather sack in which hiannon, the original of Nimue, caught and
imprisoned wawl, the earlier Merlin, like a badger in a bag.

len, Myrddins consort, appears in Malory as five different laines.
Two of them are wives of the dark god, under his names of ing
Ban and ing Nentres. A third is called the daughter of
ing ellinore, a character of uncertain origin. But the two most
famous are the ladies who loved Sir auncelotlaine the Fair, laine
the lovable, laine the lily maid of Astolat, and the luckier and
less scrupulous laine, daughter of ing elles, and mother of Sir
auncelots son, alahad.

But it is time, now that the most important figures of British mythology
have been shown under their knightly disguises, and their place in
Arthurian legend indicated, to pass on to some account of the real
subect-matter of Sir Thomas Malorys romance. ternally, it is the
history of an Arthur, ing of Britain, whom most people of Malorys time
considered as eminently a historical character. Around this central
narrative of Arthurs reign and deeds are grouped, in the form of
episodes, the personal eploits of the knights believed to have
supported him by forming a kind of household guard. But, with the
eception of a little magnified and distorted legendary history, the
whole cycle of romance may be ultimately resolved into a few myths, not
only retold, but recombined in several forms by their various tellers.
The Norman adapters of the Matire de Bretagne found the British
mythology already in process of transformation, some of the gods having
dwindled into human warriors, and others into hardly less human druids
and magicians. nder their hands the British warriors became Norman
knights, who did their deeds of prowess in the tilt-yard, and found
their inspiration in the fantastic chivalry popularized by the
Trouveres, while the druids put off their still somewhat barbaric
druidism for the more conventional magic of the atin races. More than
this, as soon as the real sequence and raison dtre of the tales had
been lost sight of, their adapters used a free hand in reweaving them.
Most of the romancers had their favourite characters whom they made the
central figure in their stories. Sir awain, Sir ercival, Sir Tristrem,
and Sir Owain all of them probably once local British sun-gods appear
as the most important personages of the romances called after their
names, stories of the doughty deeds of christened knights who had little
left about them either of Briton or of pagan.

It is only the labours of the modern scholar that can bring back to us,
at this late date, things long forgotten when Malorys book was issued
from atons press. But oblivion is not annihilation, and rofessor
hys points out to us the old myths lying embedded in their later
setting with almost the same certainty with which the geologist can show
us the fossils in the rock. Thus treated, they resolve themselves
into three principal motifs, prominent everywhere in eltic mythology:
the birth of the sun-god; the struggle between light and darkness; and
the raiding of the underworld by friendly gods for the good of man.

The first has been already dealt with. It is the retelling of the
story of the origin of the sun-god in the Mabinogi of Mth, son of
Mthonwy. For wydion we now have Arthur; instead of Arianrod, the wife
of the superannuated sky-god Nwyvre, we find the wife of ing ot, the
superannuated sky-god ludd; leu law yffes rises again as Sir awain
walchmei, and Dylan as Sir Mordred Medrawt; while the wise Merlin,
the upiter of the new system, takes the place of his wise prototype,
Mth. onnected with this first myth is the secondthe struggle between
light and darkness, of which there are several versions in the Morte
Darthur. The leading one is the rebellion of the evilly-disposed Sir
Mordred against Arthur and Sir awain; while, on other stages, Balanthe
dark god Brnfights with Balinthe sun-god Belinus; and the same Balin,
or Belinus, gives an almost mortal stroke to ellam, the ryderi of the
older mythology.

The same myth has also a wider form, in which the battle is waged for
possession of a maiden. Thus to seek no other instances wynhwyvar was
contended for by Arthur and Medrawt, or, in an earlier form of the myth,
by Arthur and wyn. In the Morte Darthur, wyn, under the corruption of
his ornish name Melwas into Sir Meliagraunce, still captures
uinevere, but it is no longer Arthur who rescues her. That task, or
privilege, has fallen to a new champion. It is Sir auncelot who follows
Sir Meliagraunce, defeats and slays him, and rescues the fair
captive. But Sir auncelot, it must be statedprobably to the
surprise of those to whom the Arthurian story without auncelot and
ueen uinevere must seem almost like the play of amlet with amlet
left out,is unknown to the original tradition. Welsh song and story
are silent with regard to him, and he is not improbably a creation of
some Norman romancer who calmly appropriated to his heros credit deeds
earlier told of other knights.

But the romantic treatment of these two myths by the adapters of the
Matire de Bretagne are of smaller interest to us at the present day
than that of the third. The attraction of the Arthurian story lies less
in the battles of Arthur or the loves of uinevere than in the legend
that has given it its lasting popularitythe hristian romance of the
uest of the oly rail. So great and various has been the inspiration
of this legend to noble works both of art and literature that it seems
almost a kind of sacrilege to trace it back, like all the rest of
Arthurs story, to a paganism which could not have even understood, much
less created, its mystical beauty. None the less is the whole story
directly evolved from primitive pagan myths concerning a miraculous
cauldron of fertility and inspiration.

In the later romances, the oly rail is a hristian relic of marvellous
potency. It had held the aschal lamb eaten at the ast Supper;
and, after the death of hrist, oseph of Arimathea had filled it with
the Saviours blood. But before it received this colouring, it had
been the magic cauldron of all the eltic mythologiesthe Dagdas
ndry which fed all who came to it, and from which none went away
unsatisfied; Brns cauldron of enovation, which brought the dead
back to life; the cauldron of Ogyrvran the iant, from which the
Muses ascended; the cauldrons captured by uchulainn from the ing
of the Shadowy ity, and by Arthur from the chief of ades; as
well as several other mythic vessels of less note.

In its transition from pagan to hristian form, hardly one of the
features of the ancient myth has been really obscured. We may recount
the chief attributes, as Taliesin tells them in his Spoiling of Annwn,
of the cauldron captured by Arthur. It was the property of wyll, and of
his son ryderi, who lived in a kingdom of the other world called, among
other titles, the evolving astle, the Four-cornered astle, the
astle of evelry, the ingly astle, the lass astle, and the
astle of iches. This place was surrounded by the sea, and in other
ways made difficult of access; there was no lack of wine there, and its
happy inhabitants spent with music and feasting an eistence which
neither disease nor old age could assail. As for the cauldron, it had a
rim of pearls around its edge; the fire beneath it was kept fanned by
the breaths of nine maidens; it spoke, doubtless in words of prophetic
wisdom; and it would not cook the food of a perurer or coward.
ere we have considerable data on which to base a parallel between the
pagan cauldron and the hristian rail.

Nor have we far to go in search of correspondences, for they are nearly
all preserved in Malorys romance. The mystic vessel was kept by ing
elles, who is wyll, in a castle called arbonek, a name which
resolves itself, in the hands of the philologist, into aer bannawg,
the square or four-cornered castlein other words, the aer
edryvan of Taliesins poem. Of the character of the place as a
astle of iches and a astle of evelry, where bright wine was the
drink of the host, we have more than a hint in the account, twice
given, of how, upon the appearance of the railborne, it should be
noticed, by a maiden or angelthe hall was filled with good odours, and
every knight found on the table all the kinds of meat and drink he could
imagine as most desirable. It could not be seen by sinners, a
hristian refinement of the savage idea of a pot that would not cook a
cowards food; but the sight of it alone would cure of wounds and
sickness those who approached it faithfully and humbly, and in its
presence neither old age nor sickness could oppress them. And,
though in Malory we find no reference either to the spot having been
surrounded by water, or to the castle as a revolving one, we have only
to turn from the Morte Darthur to the romance entitled the Seint real
to discover both. walchmei, going to the castle of ing eleur
ryderi, finds it encircled by a great water, while eredur,
approaching the same place, sees it turning with greater speed than the
swiftest wind. Moreover, archers on the walls shoot so vigorously that
no armour can resist their shafts, which eplains how it happened that,
of those that went with Arthur, ecept seven, none returned from aer
Sidi.

It is noticeable that Arthur himself never attempts the quest of the
rail, though it was he who had achieved its pagan original. We find in
Malory four competitors for the mantle of ArthurSir elleas, Sir
Bors, Sir ercivale, and Sir alahad. The first of these may be put
out of court at once, Sir elleas, who, being himself elles, or wyll,
the keeper of it, could have had no reason for such eertions. At the
second we may look doubtfully; for Sir Bors is no other than mrys, or
Myrddin, and, casting back to the earlier British mythology, we do
not find the sky-god personally active in securing boons by force or
craft from the underworld. The other two have better claimsSir
ercivale and Sir alahad. Sir ercivale is the Norman-French name for
eredur, the hero of a story in the ed Book of ergest which
gives the oldest form of a rail quest we have. It is anterior to the
Norman romances, and forms almost a connecting-link between tales of
mythology and of chivalry. eredur, or Sir ercivale, therefore, is the
oldest, most primitive, of rail seekers. On the other hand, Sir alahad
is the latest and youngest. But there is reason to believe that alahad,
in Welsh walchaved, the Falcon of Summer, is the same solar hero as
awain, in Welsh walchmei, the Falcon of May. Both are made,
in the story of ulhwch and Olwen, sons of the same mother, wyar. Sir
awain himself is, in one Arthurian romance, the achiever of the
rail. It is needless to attempt to choose between these two. Both
have the attributes of sun-gods. walchmei, the successor of leu law
yffes, and eredur aladrhir, that is to say, the Spearman with the
ong Shaft, may be allowed to claim equal honours. What is
important is that the quest of the rail, once the chief treasure of
ades, is still accomplished by one who takes in later legend the place
of ieu law yffes and ugh amhfada in the earlier British and aelic
myths as a long-armed solar deity victorious in his strife against the
owers of Darkness.

-----

Footnote :

  Tennysons Idylls of the ing; uinevere.

Footnote :

  Ibid. To the ueen.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. .

Footnote :

  resholm Island, the scene of The ntertaining of the Noble ead.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book , chap. III.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. III.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. III.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book II, chap. III.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book , chap. II; Book III, chap. I; Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book II, chap. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book II, chap. .

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. III.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p.  and note.

Footnote :

  The subect is treated at length by rofessor hys in his Arthurian
  egend, chap. IIwyll and elles.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book II, chap. .

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book III, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book III, chap. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  Op. cit., pp. -.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. III.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. III.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  See chap. IIThe Adventures of the ods of ades.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book III, chap. .

Footnote :

  Whose story is told by Tennyson in the Idylls, and by Malory in Book
  III of the Morte Darthur.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chaps. II and III.

Footnote :

  See his Studies in the Arthurian egend.

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe Mythological oming of Arthur.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chaps. I-I.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book II, chap. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book II, chap. I; Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  See chap. The ods of the aels.

Footnote :

  See chap. IIIThe Wooing of Branwen and the Beheading of Brn.

Footnote :

  See chap. IThe Mythological oming of Arthur.

Footnote :

  See chap. IIThe Irish Iliad.

Footnote :

  hap. IThe Mythological oming of Arthur.

Footnote :

  hap. IThe Mythological oming of Arthur.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chaps. II and I.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. I; Book II, chap. I; Book III, chap.
  III.

Footnote :

  Not mentioned by Malory, but stated in the romance called Seint
  real.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, pp. -; .

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book II, chap. , in which Sir Bors, Sir ercivale, and
  Sir alahad are all fed from the Sangreal.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  Translated by ady uest in her Mabinogion, under the title of
  eredur, the Son of vrawc.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. . But see whole of chap. IIIalahad
  and walchaved.

Footnote :

  The erman romance Diu rne, by einrich von dem Trlin.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, p. .

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT I

                    T DIN AND FA OF T ODS


If there be love of fame in celestial minds, those gods might count
themselves fortunate who shared in the transformation of Arthur. Their
divinity had fallen from them, but in their new rles, as heroes of
romance, they entered upon vivid reincarnations. The names of Arthurs
nights might almost be described as household words, while the gods
who had no portion in the Table ound are known only to those who busy
themselves with antiquarian lore. It is true that a few folk-tales still
survive in the remoter parts of Wales, in which the names of such
ancient British deities as wydion, wyn, Arianrod, and Dylan appear,
but it is in such a chaos of umbled and distorted legend that one finds
it hard to pick out even the slenderest thread of story. They have none
of the definite coherence of the contemporary aelic folk-tales quoted
in a previous chapter as still preserving the myths about oibniu, ugh,
ian, Manannn, thniu, and Balor. Indeed, they have reached such a
stage of disintegration that they can hardly now survive another
generation.

There have been, however, other paths by which the fame of a god might
descend to a posterity which would no longer credit his divinity. The
rolls of early British history were open to welcome any number of
mythical personages, provided that their legends were attractive.
eoffrey of Monmouths famous istoria Britonum is, under its grave
pretence of eact history, as mythological as the Morte Darthur, or even
the Mabinogion. The annals of early British saintship were not less
accommodating. A god whose tradition was too potent to be ignored or
etinguished was canonized, as a matter of course, by clerics who held
as an aiom that the toleration of the cromlech facilitated the
reception of the ospel. Only the most irreconcilable escaped
themsuch a one as wyn son of Nudd, who, found almost useless by
eoffrey and intractable by the monkish writers, remains the last
survivor of the old godsdwindled to the proportions of a fairy, but
unsubdued.

This part of resistance is perhaps the most dignified; for deities can
be sadly changed by the caprices of their euhemerizers. Dn, whom we
knew as the mother of the heaven gods, seems strangely described as a
king of ochlin and Dublin, who led the Irish into north Wales in A.D.
. More recognizable is his son wydion, who introduced the
knowledge of letters into the country of his adoption. The dynasty of
ing Dn, according to a manuscript in the collection of Mr. dward
Williamsbetter known under his bardic name of Iolo Morganwgheld north
Wales for a hundred and twenty-nine years, when the North British king,
unedda, invaded the country, defeated the Irish in a great battle, and
drove them across sea to the Isle of Man. This battle is historical,
and, putting Dn and wydion out of the question, probably represented
the last stand of the ael, in the etreme west of Britain, against the
second and stronger wave of eltic invasion. In the same collection of
Iolo Manuscripts is found a curious, and even comic, euhemeristic
version of the strange myth of the Bone rison of Oeth and Anoeth which
Manawyddan son of lyr, built in ower. The new reading makes that
ghastly abode a real building, constructed out of the bones of the
aesarians omans killed in battle with the ymri. It consisted of
numerous chambers, some of large bones and some of small, some above
ground and some under. risoners of war were placed in the more
comfortable cells, the underground dungeons being kept for traitors to
their country. Several times the aesarians demolished the prison,
but, each time, the ymri rebuilt it stronger than before. At last,
however, the bones decayed, and, being spread upon the ground, made an
ecellent manure! From that time forth the people of the neighbourhood
had astonishing crops of wheat and barley and of every other grain for
many years.

It is not, however, in these, so to speak, unauthorized narratives that
we can best refind our British deities, but in the compact, coherent,
and at times almost convincing istoria Britonum of eoffrey of
Monmouth, published in the first half of the twelfth century, and for
hundreds of years gravely quoted as the leading authority on the early
history of our islands. The modern critical spirit has, of course,
relegated it to the region of fable. We can no longer accept the
pleasant tradition of the descent of the Britons from the survivors of
Troy, led westward in search of a new home by Brutus, the great-grandson
of the pious neas. Nor indeed does any portion of the istory, from
neas to Athelstan, quite persuade the latter-day reader. Its kings
succeed one another in plausible sequence, but they themselves are too
obviously the heroes of popular legend.

A large part of eoffreys chronicletwo books out of twelveis, of
course, devoted to Arthur. In it he tells the story of that paladins
conquests, not only in his own country, against the Saons, the Irish,
the Scots, and the icts, but over all western urope. We see the
British champion, after anneing Ireland, Iceland, othland, and the
Orkneys, following up these minor victories by subduing Norway, Dacia
by which Denmark seems to have been meant, Aquitaine, and aul. After
such triumphs there was clearly nothing left for him but the overthrow
of the oman empire; and this he had practically achieved when the
rebellion of Mordred brought him home to his death, or rather for even
eoffrey does not quite lose hold of the belief in the undying Arthur
to be carried to the island of Avallon to be healed of his wounds, the
crown of Britain falling to his kinsman onstantine, the son of ador,
Duke of ornwall, in the five hundred and forty-second year of our
ords incarnation. pon the more personal incidents connected
with Arthur, eoffrey openly professes to keep silence, possibly
regarding them as not falling within the province of his history, but we
are told shortly how Mordred took advantage of Arthurs absence on the
ontinent to seize the throne, marry uanhamara uinevere, and ally
himself with the Saons, only to be defeated at that fatal battle called
by eoffrey ambula, in which Mordred, Arthur, and Walganthe Sir
awain of Malory and the walchmei of the earlier legendsall met their
dooms.

We find the gods of the older generation standing in the same position
with regard to Arthur in eoffreys istory as they do in the later
Welsh triads and tales. Though rulers, they are yet his vassals. In
three brothers of royal blood, called ot, rian, and Augusel, who are
represented as having been chiefs in the north, we may discern ludd,
rien, and Arawn. To these three Arthur restored the rights of their
ancestors, handing over the semi-sovereignty of Scotland to Augusel,
giving rian the government of Murief Moray, and re-establishing ot
in the consulship of oudonesia othian, and the other provinces
belonging to him. Two other rulers subect to him are unvasius,
ing of the Orkneys, and Malvasius, ing of Iceland, in whom we
recognize wyn, under atinized forms of his Welsh name wynwas and his
ornish name Melwas. But it is characteristic of eoffrey of Monmouths
loose hold upon his materials that, not content with having connected
several of these gods with Arthurs period, he further endows them with
reigns of their own. rien was Arthurs vassal, but rianus was
himself ing of Britain centuries before Arthur was born. ud that
is, ludd succeeded his father Beli. We hear nothing of his silver
hand, but we learn that he was famous for the building of cities, and
for rebuilding the walls of Trinovantum, which he also surrounded
with innumerable towers ... and though he had many other cities, yet he
loved this above them all, and resided in it the greater part of the
year; for which reason it was afterwards called aerlud, and by the
corruption of the word, aerlondon; and again by change of languages, in
process of time, ondon; as also by foreigners who arrived here, and
reduced this country under their subection, it was called ondres. At
last, when he was dead, his body was buried by the gate which to this
time is called in the British tongue after his name arthlud, and in the
Saon, udesgata. e was succeeded by his brother, assibellawn
assivelaunus, during whose reign ulius aesar first invaded Britain.

ludd, however, is not entirely dependent upon eoffrey of Monmouth for
his reputation as a king of Britain. One of the old Welsh romances,
translated by ady harlotte uest in her Mabinogion, relates the
rebuilding of ondon by ludd in almost the same words as eoffrey. The
story which these pseudo-historical details introduce is, however, an
obviously mythological one. It tells us how, in the days of ludd,
Britain was oppressed by three plagues. The first was the arrival of a
strange race of sorcerers called the oranians, who had three
qualities which made them unpopular; they paid their way in fairy
money, which, though apparently real, returned afterwardslike the
shields, horses, and hounds made by wydion son of Dn, to deceive
ryderiinto the fungus out of which it had been charmed by magic; they
could hear everything that was said over the whole of Britain, in
however low a tone, provided only that the wind met it; and they could
not be inured by any weapon. The second was a shriek that came on
every May eve, over every hearth in the Island of Britain, and went
through peoples hearts and so scared them that the men lost their hue
and their strength, and the women their children, and the young men and
the maidens their senses, and all the animals and trees and the earth
and the waters were left barren. The third was a disappearance of the
food hoarded in the kings palace, which was so complete that a years
provisions vanished in a single night, and so mysterious that no one
could ever find out its cause.

By the advice of his nobles, ludd went to France to obtain the help of
its king, his brother levelys, who was a man great of counsel and
wisdom. In order to be able to consult with his brother without being
overheard by the oranians, levelys caused a long tube of brass to be
made, through which they talked to one another. The sorcerer tribe,
however, got to know of it, and, though they could not hear what was
being said inside the speaking-tube, they sent a demon into it, who
whispered insulting messages up and down it, as though from one brother
to the other. But ludd and levelys knew one another too well to be
deceived by this, and they drove the demon out of the tube by flooding
it with wine. Then levelys told ludd to take certain insects, which he
would give him, and pound them in water. When the water was sufficiently
permeated with their essence, he was to call both his own people and the
oranians together, as though for a conference, and, in the midst of the
meeting, to cast it over all of them alike. The water, though harmless
to his own people, would nevertheless prove a deadly poison to the
oranians.

As for the shriek, levelys eplained it to be raised by a dragon. This
monster was the ed Dragon of Britain, and it raised the shriek because
it was being attacked by the White Dragon of the Saons, which was
trying to overcome and destroy it. The French king told his brother to
measure the length and breadth of Britain, and, when he had found the
eact centre of the island, to cause a pit to be dug there. In this pit
was to be placed a vessel containing the best mead that could be made,
with a covering of satin over it to hide it. ludd was then to watch
from some safe place. The dragons would appear and fight in the air
until they were ehausted, then they would fall together on to the top
of the satin cloth, and so draw it down with them into the vessel full
of mead. Naturally they would drink the mead, and, equally naturally,
they would then sleep. As soon as ludd was sure that they were
helpless, he was to go to the pit, wrap the satin cloth round both of
them, and bury them together in a stone coffin in the strongest place in
Britain. If this were safely done, there would be no more heard of the
shriek.

And the disappearance of the food was caused by a mighty man of magic,
who put everyone to sleep by charms before he removed the kings
provisions. ludd was to watch for him, sitting by the side of a
cauldron full of cold water. As often as he felt the approach of
drowsiness, he was to plunge into the cauldron. Thus he would be able to
keep awake and frustrate the thief.

So ludd came back to Britain. e pounded the insects in the water, and
then summoned both the men of Britain and the oranians to a meeting. In
the midst of it, he sprinkled the water over everyone alike. The natives
took no harm from this mythological beetle powder, but the oranians
died.

ludd was then ready to deal with the dragons. is careful measurements
proved that the centre of the island of Britain was at Oford, and there
he caused the pit to be dug, with the vessel of mead in it, hidden by
the satin covering. aving made everything ready, he watched, and soon
saw the dragons appear. For a long time they fought desperately in the
air; then they fell down together on to the satin cloth, and, drawing it
after them, subsided into the mead. ludd waited till they were quite
silent, and then pulled them out, folded them carefully in the wrapping,
and took them to the district of Snowdon, where he buried them in the
strong fortress whose remains, near Beddgelert, are still called Dinas
mrys. After this the terrible shriek was not heard again until Merlin
had them dug up, five hundred years later, when they recommenced
fighting, and the red dragon drove the white one out of Britain.

ast of all, ludd prepared a great banquet in his hall, and watched
over it, armed, with the cauldron of water near him. In the middle of
the night, he heard soft, drowsy music, such as nearly put him to sleep;
but he kept awake by repeatedly dipping himself in the cold water. ust
before dawn a huge man, clad in armour, came into the hall, carrying a
basket, which he began to load with the viands on the table. ike the
bag in which wyll captured wawl, its holding capacity seemed endless.
owever, the man filled it at last, and was carrying it out, when ludd
stopped him. They fought, and ludd conquered the man of magic, and made
him his vassal. Thus the Three lagues of Britain came to an end.

ludd, in changing from god to king, seems to have lost most of his old
mythological attributes. ven his daughter reudylad is taken from him
and given to another of the ancient British deities. Why ludd, the
sky-god, should have been confounded with lyr, the sea-god, is not very
apparent, but it is certain that reudylad of the early Welsh legends
and poems is the same as eoffreys ordeilla and Shakespeares
ordelia. The great dramatist was ultimately indebted to the eltic
mythology for the groundwork of the legend which he wove into the tragic
story of ing ear. eir, as eoffrey calls him, was the son of
Bladud, who built aer Badus Bath, and perished, like Icarus, as the
result of an accident with a flying-machine of his own invention. aving
no sons, but three daughters, onorilla, egan, and ordeilla, he
thought in his old age of dividing his kingdom among them. But, first of
all, he decided to make trial of their affection for him, with the idea
of giving the best portions of his realm to the most worthy. onorilla,
the eldest, replied to his question of how much she loved him, that she
called heaven to witness, she loved him more than her own soul. egan
answered with an oath, that she could not otherwise epress her
thoughts, but that she loved him above all creatures. But when it came
to ordeillas turn, the youngest daughter, disgusted with her sisters
hypocrisy, spoke after a quite different fashion. My father, said
she, is there any daughter that can love her father more than duty
requires? In my opinion, whoever pretends to it, must disguise her real
sentiments under the veil of flattery. I have always loved you as a
father, nor do I yet depart from my purposed duty; and if you insist to
have something more etorted from me, hear now the greatness of my
affection, which I always bear you, and take this for a short answer to
all your questions; look how much you have, so much is your value, and
so much do I love you. er enraged father immediately bestowed his
kingdom upon his two other daughters, marrying them to the two highest
of his nobility, onorilla to Maglaunus, Duke of Albania, and egan
to enuinus, Duke of ornwall. To ordeilla he not only refused a share
in his realm, but even a dowry. Aganippus, ing of the Franks, married
her, however, for her beauty alone.

Once in possession, eirs two sons-in-law rebelled against him, and
deprived him of all regal authority. The sole recompense for his lost
power was an agreement by Maglaunus to allow him maintenance, with a
body-guard of sity soldiers. But, after two years, the Duke of Albania,
at his wife onorillas instigation, reduced them to thirty. esenting
this, eir left Maglaunus, and went to enuinus, the husband of egan.
The Duke of ornwall at first received him honourably, but, before a
year was out, compelled him to discharge all his attendants ecept five.
This sent him back in a rage to his eldest daughter, who, this time,
swore that he should not stay with her, unless he would be satisfied
with one serving-man only. In despair, eir resolved to throw himself
upon the mercy of ordeilla, and, full of contrition for the way he had
treated her, and of misgivings as to how he might be received, took ship
for aul.

Arriving at aritia, he sent a messenger to his daughter, telling
her of his plight and asking for her help. ordeilla sent him money,
robes, and a retinue of forty men, and, as soon as he was fully equipped
with the state suitable to a king, he was received in pomp by Aganippus
and his ministers, who gave the government of aul into his hands until
his own kingdom could be restored to him. This the king of the Franks
did by raising an army and invading Britain. Maglaunus and enuinus were
routed, and eir replaced on the throne, after which he lived three
years. ordeilla, succeeding to the government of Britain, buried her
father in a certain vault, which she ordered to be made for him under
the iver Sore, in eicester lyr-cestre, and which had been built
originally under the ground to the honour of the god anus. And here all
the workmen of the city, upon the anniversary solemnity of that
festival, used to begin their yearly labours.

actly what myth is retold in this history of eir and his three
daughters we are hardly likely ever to discover. But its mythological
nature is clear enough in the light of the description of the
underground temple dedicated to lyr, at once the god of the subaqueous,
and therefore subterranean, world and a British Dis ater, connected
with the origin of things, like the oman god anus, with whom he was
apparently identified.

Ten kings or so after this for any more eact way of measuring the
flight of time is absent from eoffreys istory we recognize two
other British gods upon the scene. Brennius that is, Brn disputes the
kingdom with his brother Belinus. learly this is a version of the
ancient myth of the twin brothers, Darkness and ight, which we have
seen epressed in so many ways in eltic mythology. Brn, the god of
death and the underworld, is opposed to Belinus, god of the sun and
health. In the original, lost myth, probably they alternately conquered
and were conquereda symbol of the alternation of night and day and of
winter and summer. In eoffreys istory, they divided Britain,
Belinus taking the crown of the island with the dominions of oegria,
ambria, and ornwall, because, according to the Troan constitution,
the right of inheritance would come to him as the elder, while
Brennius, as the younger, had Northumberland, which etended from the
iver umber to aithness. But flatterers persuaded Brennius to ally
himself with the ing of the Norwegians, and attack Belinus. A battle
was fought, in which Belinus was conqueror, and Brennius escaped to
aul, where he married the daughter of the Duke of the Allobroges, and
on that rulers death was declared successor to the throne. Thus firmly
established with an army, he invaded Britain again. Belinus marched with
the whole strength of the kingdom to meet him, and the armies were
already drawn out opposite to one another in battle array when onwenna,
the mother of the two kings, succeeded in reconciling them. Not having
one another to fight with, the brothers now agreed upon a oint
epedition with their armies into aul. The Britons and the Allobroges
conquered all the other kings of the Franks, and then entered Italy,
destroying villages and cities as they marched to ome. abius and
orsena, the oman consuls, bought them off with large presents of gold
and silver and the promise of a yearly tribute, whereupon Brennius and
Belinus withdrew their army into ermany and began to devastate it. But
the omans, now no longer taken by surprise and unprepared, came to the
help of the ermans. This brought Brennius and Belinus back to ome,
which, after a long siege, they succeeded in taking. Brennius remained
in Italy, where he eercised unheard-of tyranny over the people; and
one may take the whole of this veracious history to be due to a
patriotic desire to make out the Brennus of ae ictis famewho
actually did sack ome, in B.. a Briton. Belinus, the other
brother, returned to ngland. e made a gate of wonderful structure in
Trinovantum, upon the bank of the Thames, which the citizens call after
his name Billingsgate to this day. Over it he built a prodigiously large
tower, and under it a haven or quay for ships.... At last, when he had
finished his days, his body was burned, and the ashes put up in a golden
urn, which they placed at Trinovantum, with wonderful art, on the top of
the tower above mentioned. e was succeeded by urgiunt Brabtruc,
who, as he was returning by way of the Orkneys from a raid on the Danes,
met the ships of artholon and his people as they came from Spain to
settle in Ireland.

lyr and his children, large as they bulk in mythical history, were
hardly less illustrious as saints. The family of lyr lediath is always
described by the early Welsh hagiologists as the first of the Three
chief oly Families of the Isle of Britain. The glory of lyr himself,
however, is but a reflected one; for it was his son Brn the Blessd
who actually introduced hristianity into Britain. egend tells us that
he was taken captive to ome with his son aradawc who was identified
for the purpose with the historical aratacus, and the rest of his
family, and remained there seven years, during which time he became
converted to the ospel, and spread it enthusiastically on his return.
Neither his son aradawc nor his half-brother Manawyddan eactly
followed in his footsteps, but their descendants did. aradawcs sons
were all saintly, while his daughter igen, who married a chief called
Sarrlog, lord of aer Sarrlog Old Sarum, was the first female saint in
Britain. Manawyddans side of the family was less adaptable. is son and
his grandson were both pagans, but his great-grandson obtained hristian
fame as St. Dyfan, who was sent as a bishop to Wales by ope
leutherius, and was martyred at Merthyr Dyvan. After this, the saintly
line of lyr increases and flourishes. Singularly inappropriate persons
are found in itMabon, the allo-British Apollo, as well as eraint and
others of ing Arthurs court.

It is so quaint a conceit that hristianity should have been, like
all other things, the gift of the eltic ades, that it seems almost
a pity to cast doubt on it. The witness of the classical historians
sums up, however, dead in its disfavour. Tacitus carefully
enumerates the family of aratacus, and describes how he and his
wife, daughter, and brother were separately interviewed by the
mperor laudius, but makes no mention at all of the chieftains
supposed father Brn. Moreover, Dio assius gives the name of
aratacuss father as unobelinusShakespeares ymbelinewho, he
adds, had died before the omans first invaded Britain. The evidence
is wholly against Brn as a hristian pioneer. e remains the grim
old god of war and death, blessd only to his pagan votaries, and
especially to the bards, who probably first called him Bendigeid
ran, and whose stubborn adherence must have been the cause of the
not less stubborn efforts of their enemies, the hristian clerics,
to bring him over to their own side by canonization.

They had an easier task with Brns sister, Branwen of the Fair Bosom.
oddesses, indeed, seem to have stood the process better than
godswitness Saint Brigit, the Mary of the ael. The British
Aphrodit became, under the name of Brynwyn, or Dwynwen, a patron saint
of lovers. As late as the fourteenth century, her shrine at landwynwyn,
in Anglesey, was the favourite resort of the disappointed of both sees,
who came to pray to her image for either success or forgetfulness. To
make the result the more certain, the monks of the church sold ethean
draughts from her sacred well. The legend told of her is that, having
vowed herself to perpetual celibacy, she fell in love with a young chief
called Maelon. One night, as she was praying for guidance in her
difficulty, she had a vision in which she was offered a goblet of
delicious liquor as a draught of oblivion, and she also saw the same
sweet medicine given to Maelon, whom it at once froze into a block of
ice. She was then, for her faith, offered the granting of three boons.
The first she chose was that Maelon might be allowed to resume his
natural form and temperature; the second, that she should no longer
desire to be married; and the third, that her intercessions might be
granted for all true-hearted lovers, so that they should either wed the
obects of their affection or be cured of their passion. From this
cause came the virtues of her shrine and fountain. But the modern
generation no longer flocks there, and the efficacious well is choked
with sand. None the less, she whom the Welsh bards called the Saint of
ove still has her occasional votaries. ountry girls of the
neighbourhood seek her help when all else fails. The water nearest to
the church is thought to be the best substitute for the now dry and
ruined original well.

A striking contrast to this easy victory over paganism is the stubborn
resistance to hristian adoption of wyn son of Nudd. It is true that he
was once enrolled by some monk in the train of the Blessd Brn,
but it was done in so half-hearted a way that, even now, one can discern
that the writer felt almost ashamed of himself. is fame as at least a
powerful fairy was too vital to be thus tampered with. ven Spenser,
though, in his Faerie ueene, he calls him the good Sir uyon ... in
whom great rule of Tempraunce goodly doth appeare, does not
attempt to conceal his real nature. It is no man, but

                  an lfin born, of noble state
              And mickle worship in his native land,

who sets forth the beauties of that virtue for which the original eltic
paradise, with its unfailing ale and rivers of mead and wine, would
hardly seem to have been the best possible school. Save for Spenser, all
authorities agree in making wyn the determined opponent of things
hristian. A curious and picturesque legend is told of him in
connection with St. ollen, who was himself the great-grandson of Brns
son, aradawc. The saint, desirous of still further retirement from the
world, had made himself a cell beneath a rock near lastonbury Tor, in
wyns own island of Avilion. It was close to a road, and one day he
heard two men pass by talking about wyn son of Nudd, and declaring him
to be ing of Annwn and the fairies. St. ollen put his head out of the
cell, and told them to hold their tongues, and that wyn and his fairies
were only demons. The two men retorted by warning the saint that he
would soon have to meet the dark ruler face to face. They passed on, and
not long afterwards St. ollen heard someone knocking at his door. On
asking who was there, he got the answer: I am here, the messenger of
wyn ap Nudd, ing of ades, to bid thee come by the middle of the day
to speak with him on the top of the hill. The saint did not go; and the
messenger came a second time with the same message. On the third visit,
he added a threat that, if St. ollen did not come now, it would be the
worse for him. So, a little disquieted, he went, but not unarmed. e
consecrated some water, and took it with him.

On other days the top of lastonbury Tor had always been bare, but on
this occasion the saint found it crowned by a splendid castle. Men and
maidens, beautifully dressed, were going in and out. A page received him
and told him that the king was waiting for him to be his guest at
dinner. St. ollen found wyn sitting on a golden chair in front of a
table covered with the rarest dainties and wines. e invited him to
share them, adding that if there was anything he especially liked, it
should be brought to him with all honour. I do not eat the leaves of
trees, replied the saint, who knew what fairy meats and drinks were
made of. Not taken aback by this discourteous answer, the ing of Annwn
genially asked the saint if he did not admire his servants livery,
which was a motley costume, red on one side and blue on the other.
Their dress is good enough for its kind, said St. ollen. What kind
is that? asked wyn. The red shows which side is being scorched, and
the blue shows which side is being frozen, replied the saint, and,
splashing his holy water all round him, he saw castle, serving-men, and
king vanish, leaving him alone on the bare, windy hill-top.

wyn, last of the gods of Annwn, has evidently by this time taken over
the functions of all the others. e has the hounds which Arawn once
hadthe wn Annwn, dogs of hell, with the white bodies and the red
ears. We hear more of them in folklore than we do of their master,
though even their tradition is dying out with the spread of newspapers
and railways. We are not likely to find another everend dmund
ones to insist upon belief in them, lest, by closing our minds to
such manifest witnesses of the supernatural world, we should become
infidels. Still, we may even now find peasants ready to swear that they
have heard them sweeping along the hill-sides upon stormy nights, as
they pursued the flying souls of unshriven men or unbaptized babes. The
tales told of them agree curiously. Their cry is like that of a pack of
fohounds, but softer in tone. The nearer they are to a man, the less
loud their voices seem, and the farther off they are, the louder. But
they are less often seen than heard, and it has been suggested that the
sounds were the cries of migrating bean-geese, which are not unlike
those of hounds in chase. The superstition is widely spread. The wn
Annwn of Wales are called in North Devon the eth eath or eathen,
or ell ounds, and on Dartmoor, the Wish ounds. In Durham and
orkshire they are called abriel ounds, and they are known by
various names in Norfolk, loucestershire, and ornwall. In Scotland it
is Arthur who leads the Wild unt, and the tradition is found over
almost the whole of western urope.

Not many folk-tales have been preserved in which wyn is mentioned by
name. is memory has lingered longest and latest in the fairy-haunted
ale of Neath, so close to his ridge, the Taw abode ... not the
nearest Taw ... but that Taw which is the farthest. But it may be
understood whenever the king of the fairies is mentioned. As the last of
the greater gods of the old mythology, he has been endowed by popular
fancy with the rule of all the varied fairy population of Britain, so
far, at least, as it is of eltic or pre-eltic origin. For some of the
fairies most famous in nglish literature are Teutonic. ing Oberon
derives his name, through the French fabliau, from lberich, the
dwarf king of the Niebelungenlied, though his queen, Titania, was
probably named out of Ovids Metamorphoses. uck, another of
Shakespeares fays, is merely the personification of his race, the
pwccas of Wales, pookas of Ireland, poakes of Worcestershire, and
piies of the West of ngland. It is Wales that at the present
time preserves the most numerous and diverse collection of fairies. Some
of them are beautiful, some hideous; some kindly, some malevolent. There
are the gentle damsels of the lakes and streams called wragedd Annwn,
and the fierce and cruel mountain fairies known as the wyllion. There
are the household sprites called Bwbachod, like the Scotch and nglish
brownies; the oblynau, or gnomes of the mines called knockers in
ornwall; and the llyllon, or elves, of whom the pwccas are a
branch. In the North of ngland the spirits belong more wholly to
the lower type. The bogles, brownies, killmoulis, redcaps, and their
like seem little akin to the higher, Aryan-seeming fairies. The Welsh
bwbach, too, is described as brown and hairy, and the coblynau as black
or copper-faced. We shall hardly do wrong in regarding such spectres as
the degraded gods of a pre-Aryan race, like the Irish leprechauns and
pookas, who have nothing in common with the still beautiful, still noble
figures of the Tuatha D Danann.

Of these numberless and nameless subects of wyn, some dwell beneath
the earth or under the surface of lakeswhich seem to take, in Wales,
the place of the aelic fairy hillsand others in Avilion, a
mysterious western isle of all delights lying on or ust beneath the
sea. embrokeshirethe ancient Dyfedhas kept the tradition most
completely. The story goes that there is a certain square yard in the
hundred of emmes in that county which holds the secret of the fairy
realm. If a man happens to set his feet on it by chance, his eyes are
opened, and he can see that which is hidden from other menthe fairy
country and commonwealth,but, the moment he moves from the enchanted
spot, he loses the vision, and he can never find the same place
again. That country is upon the sea, and not far from shore; like
the Irish paradise of which it is the counterpart, it may sometimes be
sighted by sailors. The reen Meadows of nchantment are still an
article of faith among embrokeshire and aermarthenshire sailors, and
evidently not without some reason. In  a correspondent of the
embroke ounty uardian sent in a report made to him by a certain
aptain ohn vans to the effect that, one summer morning, while
trending up the hannel, and passing resholm Island the scene of the
entertaining of Brns head, in what he had always known as deep water,
he was surprised to see to windward of him a large tract of land covered
with a beautiful green meadow. It was not, however, above water, but two
or three feet below it, so that the grass waved or swam about as the
ripple floated over it, in a way that made one who watched it feel
drowsy. aptain vans had often heard of the tradition of the fairy
island from old people, but admitted that he had never hoped to see it
with his own eyes. As with the ounds of Annwn one may suspect a
quite natural eplanation. Mirage is at once common enough and rare
enough on our coasts to give rise to such a legend, and it must have
been some such phenomenon as the Fata Morgana of Sicily which has made
sober men swear so confidently to ocular evidence of the eltic
aradise, whether seen from the farthest western coasts of aelic
Ireland or Scotland, or of British Wales.

-----

Footnote :

  See, for eample, a folk-tale, pp. - in hyss eltic
  Folklore.

Footnote :

  Stephenss reliminary Dissertation to his translation of Aneurins
  ododin.

Footnote :

  Iolo MSS., p. .

Footnote :

  Iolo MSS., pp. -.

Footnote :

  istoria Britonum, Books I, , and chaps. I and II of I.

Footnote :

  istoria Britonum, Book I, chap. II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book I, chap. II. They appear also as uanius, ing of
  the uns, and Melga, ing of the icts, in Book , chap. I.

Footnote :

  istoria Britonum, Book III, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book III, chap. .

Footnote :

  I.e. ondon, under its traditionary earlier name, Troa Nova, given
  it by Brutus.

Footnote :

  The Story of ludd and levelys.

Footnote :

  The name means dwarfs. hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  istoria Britonum, Book II, chap, -I.

Footnote :

  Alba, or North Britain.

Footnote :

  Now alais.

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, pp. -.

Footnote :

  istoria Britonum, Book III, chaps. I-.

Footnote :

  The same fabulous personage, perhaps, as the original of abelais
  argantua, a popular eltic god.

Footnote :

  istoria Britonum, Book III, haps. I-II.

Footnote :

  See the Iolo MSS. The genealogies and families of the saints of the
  island of Britain. opied by Iolo Morganwg in  from the ong Book
  of Thomas Truman of antlliwydd in the parish of lansanor in
  lamorgan, p. , c. Also see An ssay on the Welsh Saints by the
  ev. ice ees, Sections I and .

Footnote :

  hys: Arthurian egend, pp. -.

Footnote :

  Iolo MSS., p. .

Footnote :

  The Welsh bards call Dwynwen the goddess, or saint of love and
  affection, as the poets designate enus. Iolo MSS.

Footnote :

  Wirt Sikes: British oblins, p. .

Footnote :

  Iolo MSS., p. .

Footnote :

  The Faerie ueene, rologue to Book II.

Footnote :

  Ibid., Book II, canto I, verse .

Footnote :

  ublished in  real ondon, , and is to be found quoted in
  hys: Arthurian egend, pp. , ; also in Sikes: British
  oblins, pp. -.

Footnote :

  A elation of Apparitions of Spirits in the ounty of Monmouth and
  the rincipality of Wales. ublished at Newport, .

Footnote :

  Thistleton Dyer: Folklore of Shakespeare, p. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  Wirt Sikes: British oblins, p. .

Footnote :

  The Brython, ol. I, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: eltic Folklore, pp. -.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        SIAS OF T TI
                                AANISM

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              AT 

              SIAS OF T TI AANISM INTO MODN
                                 TIMS


The fall of the eltic state worship began earlier in Britain than in
her sister island. Neither was it hristianity that struck the first
blow, but the rough humanity and stern ustice of the omans. That
people was more tolerant, perhaps, than any the world has ever known
towards the religions of others, and gladly welcomed the eltic godsas
godsinto its own diverse antheon. A friendly aulish or British
divinity might at any time be granted the so-to-speak divine oman
citizenship, and be assimilated to upiter, to Mars, to Apollo, or to
any other properly accredited deity whom the omans deemed him to
resemble. It was not against the god, but against his worship at the
hands of his priests, that oman law struck. The colossal human
sacrifices of the druids horrified even a people who were far from
squeamish about a little bloodshed. They themselves had abolished such
practices by a decree of the senate before aesar first invaded
Britain, and could not therefore permit within their empire a cult
which slaughtered men in order to draw omens from their
death-agonies. Druidism was first required to be renounced by those
who claimed oman citizenship; then it was vigorously put down among the
less civilized tribes. Tacitus tells us how the Island of Mona
Angleseythe great stronghold of druidismwas attacked, its sacred
groves cut down, its altars laid level, and its priests put to the
sword. liny, recording how the mperor Tiberius had suppressed
the druids, congratulates his fellow-countrymen on having put an end,
wherever their dominion etended, to the monstrous customs inspired by
the doctrine that the gods could take pleasure in murder and
cannibalism. The practice of druidism, with its attendant
barbarities, abolished in Britain wherever the long oman arm could
reach to strike, took refuge beyond the Northern Wall, among the savage
aledonian tribes who had not yet submitted to the invaders yoke.
Naturally, too, it remained untouched in Ireland. But before the omans
left Britain, it had been etirpated everywhere, ecept among the icts
and Scots.

hristianity, following the oman rule, completed the ruin of paganism
in Britain, so far, at least, as its public manifestations were
concerned. In the sith century of our era, the monkish writer, ildas,
is able to refer complacently to the ancient British religion as a dead
faith. I shall not, he says, enumerate those diabolical idols of my
country, which almost surpassed in number those of gypt, and of which
we still see some mouldering away within or without the deserted
temples, with stiff and deformed features as was customary. Nor will I
cry out upon the mountains, fountains, or hills, or upon the rivers,
which now are subservient to the use of men, but once were an
abomination and destruction to them, and to which the blind people paid
divine honour. And with the idols fell the priests. The very word
druid became obsolete, and is scarcely mentioned in the earliest
British literature, though druids are prominent characters in the Irish
writings of the same period.

The secular arm had no power in Scotland and in Ireland, consequently
the battle between aganism and hristianity was fought upon more equal
terms, and lasted longer. In the first country, Saint olumba, and in
the second, Saint atrick are the personages who, at any rate according
to tradition, beat down the druids and their gods. Adamnan, Abbot of
Iona, who wrote his ita olumb in the last decade of the seventh
century, describes how, a century earlier, that saint had carried the
ospel to the icts. Their king, Brude, received him contemptuously, and
the royal druids left no heathen spell unuttered to thwart and annoy
him. But, as the power of Moses was greater than the power of the
magicians of gypt, so Saint olumbas prayers caused miracles more
wonderful and more convincing than any wrought by his adversaries. Such
stories belong to the atmosphere of myth which has always enveloped
heroic men; the essential fact is that the icts abandoned the old
religion for the new.

A similar legend sums up the life-work of Saint atrick in Ireland.
Before he came, romm ruaich had received from time immemorial his
yearly toll of human lives. But Saint atrick faced the gruesome idol;
as he raised his crozier, we are told, the demon fell shrieking from his
image, which, deprived of its soul, bowed forward to the ground.

It is far easier, however, to overthrow the more public manifestations
of a creed than to destroy its inner vital force. romm ruaichs idol
might fall, but his spirit would survivea very roteus. The sacred
places of the ancient eltic religion might be invaded, the idols and
altars of the gods thrown down, the priests slain, scattered, or
banished, and the cult officially declared to be etinct; but, driven
from the important centres, it would yet survive outside and around
them. The more civilized aels and Britons would no doubt accept the
purer gospel, and abandon the gods they had once adored, but the
peasantrythe bulk of the populationwould still cling to the familiar
rites and names. A nobler belief and a higher civilization come, after
all, only as surface waves upon the great ocean of human life; beneath
their agitations lies a vast slumbering abyss of half-conscious faith
and thought to which culture penetrates with difficulty and in which
changes come very slowly.

We have already shown how long and how faithfully the aelic and Welsh
peasants clung to their old gods, in spite of all the efforts of the
clerics to eplain them as ancient kings, to transform them into
wonder-working saints, or to ban them as demons of hell. This
conservative religious instinct of the agricultural populations is not
confined to the inhabitants of the British Islands. The modern reeks
still believe in nereids, in lamias, in sirens, and in haron, the dark
ferryman of ades. The descendants of the omans and truscans hold
that the old truscan gods and the oman deities of the woods and fields
still live in the world as spirits. The high altars of the ord of
the Mound and his terrible kin were levelled, and their golden images
and great temples left to moulder in abandonment; but the rude rustic
shrine to the rude rustic god still received its offerings. It is this
shifting of the care of the pagan cult from chief to peasant, from court
to hovel, and, perhaps, to some etent from higher to lower race, that
serves to eplain how the more primitive and uncouth gods have tended so
largely to supplant those of higher, more graceful mien. Aboriginal
deities, thrust into obscurity by the invasion of higher foreign types,
came back to their own again.

For it seems plain that we must divide the spiritual population of the
British Islands into two classes. There is little in common between the
fairy, strictly so-called, and the unsightly elf who appears under
various names and guises, as pooka, leprechaun, brownie, knocker, or
bogle. The one belongs to such divine tribes as the Tuatha D Danann of
aelic myth or their kin, the British gods of the Mabinogion. The other
owes his origin to a quite different, and much lower, kind of
imagination. One might fancy that neolithic man made him in his own
image.

None the less has immemorial tradition wonderfully preserved the
essential features of the eltic nature-gods. The fairy belief of the
present day hardly differs at all from the conception which the elts
had of their deities. The description of the Tuatha D Danann in the
Dialogue of the lders as sprites or fairies with corporeal or
material forms but indued with immortality would stand as an account of
prevailing ideas as to the good people to-day. Nor do the Irish and
Welsh fairies of popular belief differ from one another. Both alike live
among the hills, though in Wales a lake often takes the place of the
fairy mound; both, though they war and marry among themselves, are
semi-immortal; both covet the children of men, and will steal them from
the cradle, leaving one of their own uncanny brood in the mortal babys
stead; both can lay men and women under spells; both delight in music
and the dance, and live lives of unreal and fantastic splendour and
luury. Another point in which they resemble one another is in their
tiny size. But this would seem to be the result of the literary
convention originated by Shakespeare; in genuine folktales, both aelic
and British, the fairies are pictured as of at least mortal
stature.

But, Aryan or Iberian, beautiful or hideous, they are fast vanishing
from belief. very year, the secluded valleys in which men and women
might still live in the old way, and dream the old dreams, tend more and
more to be thrown open to the modern world of rapid movement and rapid
thought. The last ten years have perhaps done more in this direction
than the preceding ten generations. What lone shepherd or fisherman will
ever see again the vision of the great Manannn? ave the stable-boys of
to-day still any faith left in Finvarra? Is wyn ap Nudd often thought
of in his own valleys of the Taw and the Nedd? It would be hard,
perhaps, to find a whole-hearted believer even in his local pooka or
parish bogle.

It is the ritual observances of the old eltic faith which have better
weathered, and will longer survive, the disintegrating influences of
time. There are no hard names to be remembered. Things may still be done
for luck which were once done for religion. ustomary observances die
very slowly, held up by an only half acknowledged fear that, unless they
are fulfilled, something may happen. We shall get, therefore, more
satisfactory evidence of the nature of the eltic paganism by eamining
such customs than in any other way.

We find three forms of the survival of the ancient religion into quite
recent times. The first is the celebration of the old solar or
agricultural festivals of the spring and autumn equinoes and of the
summer and winter solstices. The second is the practice of a symbolic
human sacrifice by those who have forgotten its meaning, and only know
that they are keeping up an old custom, oined with late instances of
the actual sacrifices of animals to avert cattle-plagues or to change
bad luck. The third consists of many still-living relics of the once
universal worship of sacred waters, trees, stones, and animals.

Whatever may have been the eact meaning of the eltic state worship,
there seems to be no doubt that it centred around the four great days in
the year which chronicle the rise, progress, and decline of the sun,
and, therefore, of the fruits of the earth. These were: Beltaine, which
fell at the beginning of May; Midsummer Day, marking the triumph of
sunshine and vegetation; the Feast of ugh, when, in August, the
turning-point of the suns course had been reached; and the sad Samhain,
when he bade farewell to power, and fell again for half a year under the
sway of the evil forces of winter and darkness.

Of these great solar periods, the first and the last were, naturally,
the most important. The whole eltic mythology seems to revolve upon
them, as upon pivots. It was on the day of Beltaine that artholon and
his people, the discoverers, and, indeed, the makers of Ireland, arrived
there from the other world, and it was on the same day, three hundred
years later, that they returned whence they came. It was on Beltaine-day
that the aelic gods, the Tuatha D Danann, and, after them, the aelic
men, first set foot on Irish soil. It was on the day of Samhain that the
Fomors oppressed the people of Nemed with their terrible ta; and it was
again at Samhain that a later race of gods of light and life finally
conquered those demons at the Battle of Moytura. Only one important
mythological incidentand that was one added at a later time!happened
upon any other than one of those two days; it was upon Midsummer Day,
one of the lesser solar points, that the people of the goddess Danu took
Ireland from its inhabitants, the Fir Bolgs.

The mythology of Britain preserves the same root-idea as that of
Ireland. If anything uncanny took place, it was sure to be on May-day.
It was on the night of the first of May that hiannon lost, and
Teirnyon Twryf liant found, the infant ryderi, as told in the first of
the Mabinogion. It was on every May-eve that the two dragons
fought and shrieked in the reign of ing ludd. It is on every
first of May till the day of doom that wyn son of Nudd, fights with
wyrthur son of reidawl, for ludds fair daughter, reudylad. And
it was when she was a-maying in the woods and fields near Westminster
that the same wyn, or Melwas, under his romance-name of Sir
Meliagraunce, captured Arthurs queen, uinevere.

The nature of the rites performed upon these days can be surmised from
their pale survivals. They are still celebrated by the descendants of
the elts, though it is probable that few of them knowor would even
care to knowwhy May Day, St. ohns Day, ammas, and alloween are
times of ceremony. The firstcalled Beltaine in Ireland, Bealtiunn
in Scotland, Shenn da Boaldyn in the Isle of Man, and alan-Mai the
alends of May in Walescelebrates the waking of the earth from her
winter sleep, and the renewal of warmth, life, and vegetation. This is
the meaning of the May-pole, now rarely seen in our streets, though
Shakespeare tells us that in his time the festival was so eagerly
anticipated that no one could sleep upon its eve. At midnight the
people rose, and, going to the nearest woods, tore down branches of
trees, with which the sun, when he rose, would find doors and windows
decked for him. They spent the day in dancing round the May-pole, with
rude, rustic mirth, man oining with nature to celebrate the coming of
summer. The opposite to it was the day called Samhain in Ireland and
Scotland, Sauin in Man, and Nos alan-gaeof the Night of the Winter
alends in Wales. This festival was a sad one: summer was over, and
winter, with its short, sunless days and long, dreary nights, was at
hand. It was the beginning, too, of the ancient eltic year, and
omens for the future might be etorted from dark powers by uncanny
rites. It was the holiday of the dead and of all the more evil
supernatural beings. On November-eve, says a North ardiganshire
proverb, there is a bogy on every stile. The Scotch have even invented
a special bogythe Samhanach or goblin which comes out at
Samhain.

The sun-god himself is said to have instituted the August festival
called ugnassad ughs commemoration in Ireland, la luanys in
Man, and wyl Awst August Feast in Wales; and it was once of hardly
less importance than Beltaine or Samhain. It is noteworthy, too, that
the first of August was a great day at yonsformerly called ugudunum,
the dn town of ugus. The midsummer festival, on the other hand,
has largely merged its mythological significance in the hristian Feast
of St. ohn.

The characteristic features of these festivals give certain proof of
the original nature of the great pagan ceremonials of which they are
the survivals and travesties. In all of them, bonfires are
lighted on the highest hills, and the hearth fires solemnly rekindled.
They form the ecuse for much sport and ollity. But there is yet
something sinister in the air; the fairies are active and abroad,
and one must be careful to omit no prescribed rite, if one would avoid
kindling their anger or falling into their power. To some of these
still-half-believed-in nature-gods offerings were made down to a
comparatively late period. When ennant wrote, in the eighteenth
century, it was the custom on Beltaine-day in many ighland villages
to offer libations and cakes not only to the spirits who were
believed to be beneficial to the flocks and herds, but also to
creatures like the fo, the eagle, and the hoodie-crow which so often
molested them. At alloween the eltic Samhain the natives of
the ebrides used to pour libations of ale to a marine god called
Shony, imploring him to send sea-weed to the shore. In honour,
also, of such beings, curious rites were performed. Maidens washed
their faces in morning dew, with prayers for beauty. They carried
sprigs of the rowan, that mystic tree whose scarlet berries were the
ambrosial food of the Tuatha D Danann.

In their original form, these now harmless rural holidays were
undoubtedly religious festivals of an orgiastic nature-worship such as
became so popular in reece in connection with the cult of Dionysus. The
great lords of life and of the powers of nature that made and ruled
life were propitiated by maddening invocations, by riotous dances, and
by human sacrifice.

The bonfires which fill so large a part in the modern festivals have
been casually mentioned. Originally they were no mere feu de oie,
but had a terrible meaning, which the customs connected with them
preserve. At the ighland Beltaine, a cake was divided by lot, and
whoever drew the burnt piece was obliged to leap three times over the
flames. At the midsummer bonfires in Ireland all passed through the
fire; the men when the flames were highest, the women when they were
lower, and the cattle when there was nothing left but smoke. In Wales,
upon the last day of October, the old Samhain, there was a slightly
different, and still more suggestive rite. The hill-top bonfires were
watched until they were announced to be etinct. Then all would race
headlong down the hill, shouting a formula to the effect that the devil
would get the hindmost. The devil of a new belief is the god of the one
it has supplanted; in all three instances, the custom was no mere
meaningless horse-play, but a symbolical human sacrifice.

A similar observance, but of a more cruel kind, was kept up in France
upon St. ohns Day, until forbidden by law in the reign of ouis the
Fourteenth. Baskets containing living wolves, foes, and cats were
burned upon the bonfires, under the auspices and in the presence of the
sheriffs or the mayor of the town. aesar noted the custom among
the druids of constructing huge wicker-work images, which they filled
with living men, and set on fire, and it can hardly be doubted that the
wretched wolves, foes, and cats were ceremonial substitutes for human
beings.

An ingenious theory was invented, after the introduction of
hristianity, with the purpose of allowing such ancient rites to
continue, with a changed meaning. The passing of persons and cattle
through flame or smoke was eplained as a practice which interposed a
magic protection between them and the powers of evil. This homopathic
device of using the evil powers own sacred fire as a means of
protection against himself somewhat suggests that seething of the kid in
its mothers milk which was reprobated by the evitical law; but, no
doubt, pagan demons were considered fair game. The eplanation, of
course, is an obviously and clumsily forced one; it was the grim
druidical philosophy thatto quote aesarunless the life of man was
repaid for the life of man, the will of the immortal gods could not be
appeased that dictated both the national and the private human
sacrifices of the elts, the shadows of which remain in the leaping
through the bonfires, and in the numerous recorded sacrifices of cattle
within quite recent times.

Mr. aurence omme, in his thnology in Folklore, has collected many
modern instances of the sacrifices of cattle not only in Ireland and
Scotland, but also in Wales, orkshire, Northamptonshire, ornwall, and
the Isle of Man. Within twenty miles of the metropolis of Scotland
a relative of rofessor Simpson offered up a live cow as a sacrifice to
the spirit of the murrain. In Wales, when cattle-sickness broke
out, a bullock was immolated by being thrown down from the top of a high
rock. enerally, however, the wretched victims were burned alive. In
 an Isle of Man farmer offered a heifer as a burnt offering near
Tynwald ill, to avert the anger of the ghostly occupant of a barrow
which had been desecrated by opening. Sometimes, even, these burnt
oblations were offered to an alleged hristian saint. The registers of
the resbytery of Dingwall for the years  and  contain records
of the sacrifices of cattle upon the site of an ancient temple in honour
of a being whom some called St. Mourie, and others, perhaps knowing
his doubtful character, ane god Mourie. At irkcudbright, it was
St. uthbert, and at lynnog, in Wales, it was St. Beuno, who was
thought to delight in the blood of bulls.

Such sacrifices of cattle appear mainly to have been offered to stay
plague among cattle. Man for man and beast for beast, was, perhaps, the
old rule. But among all nations, human sacrifices have been gradually
commuted for those of animals. The family of the Oerlebys in
Ballyvorney, ounty ork, used in olden days to keep an idol, an image
of wood about two feet high, carved and painted like a woman. She
was the goddess of smallpo, and to her a sheep was immolated on behalf
of anyone seized with that disease.

The third form of eltic pagan survival is found in numerous instances
of the adoration of water, trees, stones, and animals. ike the other
Aryan nations, the elts worshipped their rivers. The Dee received
divine honours as a war-goddess with the title of Aerfon, while the
ibble, under its name of Belisama, was identified by the omans with
Minerva. Myths were told of them, as of the sacred streams of
reece. The Dee gave oracles as to the results of the perpetual wars
between the Welsh and the nglish; as its stream encroached either upon
the Welsh or the nglish side, so one nation or the other would be
victorious. The Tweed, like many of the reek rivers, was credited
with human descendants. That the rivers of reat Britain received
human sacrifices is clear from the folklore concerning many of them.
Deprived of their epected offerings, they are believed to snatch by
stealth the human lives for which they crave. iver of Dart, iver of
Dart, every year thou claimest a heart, runs the Devonshire folk-song.
The Spey, too, requires a life yearly, but the Spirit of the ibble
is satisfied with one victim at the end of every seven years.

vidence, however, of the worship of rivers is scanty compared with that
of the adoration of wells. In the case of well-worship, says Mr.
omme, it may be asserted with some confidence that it prevails in
every county of the three kingdoms. e finds it most vital in the
aelic counties, somewhat less so in the British, and almost entirely
wanting in the Teutonic south-east. So numerous, indeed, are holy
wells that several monographs have been written solely upon them.
In some cases these wells were resorted to for the cure of diseases; in
others, to obtain change of weather, or good luck. Offerings were made
to them, to propitiate their guardian gods or nymphs. ennant tells us
that in olden times the rich would sacrifice one of their horses at a
well near Abergeleu, to secure a blessing upon the rest. Fowls were
offered at St. Teglas Well, near Wreham, by epileptic patients.
But of late years the well-spirits have had to be content with much
smaller tributessuch trifles as pins, rags, coloured pebbles, and small
coins.

With sacred wells were often connected sacred trees, to whose branches
rags and small pieces of garments were suspended by their humble
votaries. Sometimes, where the ground near the well was bare of
vegetation, bushes were artificially placed beside the water. The same
people who venerated wells and trees would pay equal adoration to sacred
stones. ord oden, describing, in , the Island of Inniskea, off the
coast of Mayo, asserts that a sacred well called Derrivla and a sacred
stone called Neevougi, which was kept carefully wrapped up in flannel
and brought out at certain periods to be publicly adored, seemed to be
the only deities known to that lone Atlantic islands three hundred
inhabitants. It sounds incredible; but there is ample evidence of
the worship of fetish stones by quite modern inhabitants of our islands.
The lan hattan kept such a stone in the Isle of Arran; it was
believed, like the stone of Inniskea, to be able to cure diseases, and
was kept carefully wrapped up in fair linen cloth, and about that there
was a piece of woollen cloth. Similarly, too, the worship of wells
was connected with the worship of animals. At a well in the Devils
auseway, between uckley and Acton, in Shropshire, lived, and perhaps
still live, four frogs who were, and perhaps still are, believed to be
the devil and his impsthat is to say, gods or demons of a proscribed
idolatry. In Ireland such guardian spirits are usually fishtrout,
eels, or salmon thought to be endowed with eternal life. The genius
of a well in Banffshire took the form of a fly, which was also said to
be undying, but to transmigrate from body to body. Its function was to
deliver oracles; according as it seemed active or lethargic, its
votaries drew their omens. It is needless to multiply instances of
a still surviving cult of water, trees, stones, and animals. nough to
say that it would be easy. What concerns us is that we are face to face
in Britain with living forms of the oldest, lowest, most primitive
religion in the worldone which would seem to have been once universal,
and which, crouching close to the earth, lets other creeds blow over it
without effacing it, and outlives one and all of them.

It underlies the three great world-religions, and still forms the real
belief of perhaps the maority of their titular adherents. It is
characteristic of the wisdom of the hristian hurch that, knowing its
power, she sought rather to sanctify than to etirpate it. What once
were the eltic equivalents of the reek fountains of the nymphs were
consecrated as holy wells. The process of so adopting them began
early. St. olumba, when he went in the sith century to convert the
icts, found a spring which they worshipped as a god; he blessed it, and
from that day the demon separated from the water. Indeed, he so
sanctified no less than three hundred such springs. Sacred stones
were equally taken under the gis of hristianity. Some were placed on
the altars of cathedrals, others built into consecrated walls. The
animal gods either found themselves the heroes of hristian legends, or
where, for some reason, such adoption was hopeless, were proclaimed
witches animals, and dealt with accordingly. Such happened to the
hare, a creature sacred to the ancient Britons, but now in bad
odour among the superstitious. The wren, too, is hunted to death upon
St. Stephens Day in Ireland. Its crime is said to be that it has a
drop of the deils blood in it, but the real reason is probably to be
found in the fact that the Irish druids used to draw auguries from its
chirpings.

                                              

We have made in this volume some attempt to draw a picture of the
ancient religion of our earliest ancestors, the aelic and the British
elts. We have shown what can be gathered of the broken remnants of a
mythology as splendid in conception and as brilliant in colour as that
of the reeks. We have tried to paint its divine figures, and to retell
their heroic stories. We have seen them fall from their shrines, and
yet, rising again, take on new lives as kings, or saints, or knights of
romance, and we have caught fading glimpses of them surviving to-day as
the fairies, their rites still cherished by worshippers who hardly
know who or why they worship. Of necessity this survey has been brief
and incomplete. Whether the great edifice of the eltic mythology will
ever be wholly restored one can at present only speculate. Its colossal
fragments are perhaps too deeply buried and too widely scattered. But,
even as it stands ruined, it is a mighty quarry from which poets yet
unborn will hew spiritual marble for houses not made with hands.

-----

Footnote :

  In the year  B..

Footnote :

  Strabo, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote :

  Annals, Book I, chap. .

Footnote :

  Natural istory, Book .

Footnote :

  ildas. See Si Old nglish hroniclesBohns ibraries.

Footnote :

  ennell odd: ustoms and ore of Modern reece. Stuart lennie:
  reek Folk Songs.

Footnote :

  harles odfrey eland: truscan oman emains in opular Tradition.

Footnote :

  hys: eltic Folklore, p. ; urtin: Tales of the Fairies and of
  the host World; and Mr. eland Duncans Fairy Beliefs from ounty
  eitrim in Folklore, une, .

Footnote :

  The Mabinogi of wyll, rince of Dyfed.

Footnote :

  The story of ludd and levelys.

Footnote :

  ulhwch and Olwen.

Footnote :

  Morte Darthur, Book I, chaps. I and II.

Footnote :

  enry III, act , scene .

Footnote :

  hys: ibbert ectures, p. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  A good account of the Irish festivals is given by ady Wilde in her
  Ancient egends of Ireland, pp. -.

Footnote :

  ennant: A Tour in Scotland and oyage to the ebrides, .

Footnote :

  Martin: Description of the Western Islands of Scotland, .

Footnote :

  aidoz: squisse de la ligion des aulois, p. .

Footnote :

  omme: thnology in Folklore, pp. -.

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  Mitchell: The ast in the resent, pp. , .

Footnote :

  lton: Origins of nglish istory, p. .

Footnote :

  omme: thnology in Folklore, p. .

Footnote :

  The word Dee probably meant divinity. The river was also called
  Dyfridwy, i.e. water of the divinity. See hys: ectures on Welsh
  hilology, p. .

Footnote :

  hys: eltic Britain, p. .

Footnote :

  ogers: Social ife in Scotland, chap. III, p. .

Footnote :

  Folklore, chap. III, p. .

Footnote :

  enderson: Folklore of Northern ounties, p. .

Footnote :

  omme: thnology in Folklore, p. .

Footnote :

  ope: oly Wells of ngland; arvey: oly Wells of Ireland.

Footnote :

  Sikes: British oblins, p. .

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  oden: rogress of the eformation in Ireland, pp. -.

Footnote :

  Martin: Description of the Western Islands, pp. -.

Footnote :

  Burne: Shropshire Folklore, p. .

Footnote :

  omme: thnology in Folklore, pp. -.

Footnote :

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote :

  Adamnans ita olumb.

Footnote :

  Dr. Whitley Stokes: Three Middle Irish omilies.

Footnote :

  aesar: De Bello allico, Book , chap. II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                ANDI


                   A FW BOOS ON TI MTOO
                             AND ITAT

The obect of this short list is merely to supplement the marginal notes
by pointing out to a reader desirous of going deeper into the subect
the most recent and accessible works upon it. That they should be
accessible is, in its intention, the most important thing; and therefore
only books easily and cheaply obtainable will be mentioned.


                              INTODTO

Matthew Arnold.T STD OF TI ITAT. opular dition.
    ondon, .

rnest enan.T OT OF T TI AS and other studies.
    Translated by William . utchinson. ondon, .

    Two eloquent appreciations of eltic literature.

Magnus Maclean, M.A., D...T ITAT OF T TS. Its
    istory and omance. ondon, .

    A handy eposition of all the branches of eltic literature.

lizabeth A. Sharp editor.A TIA. An Anthology of
    epresentative eltic oetry. Ancient Irish, Alban, aelic,
    Breton, ymric, and Modern Scottish and Irish eltic oetry.
    With introduction and notes by William Sharp. dinburgh, .

Alfred Nutt.TI AND MDIA OMAN. No.  of Mr. Nutts
    opular Studies in Mythology, omance, and Folklore. ondon,
    .

    A pamphlet briefly tracing the indebtedness of medival
    uropean literature to pre-medival eltic sources.


                               ISTOIA

. dArbois de ubainville.A IIISATION DS TS T  D
    O OMI. aris, .

    ol. I of the authors monumental ours de ittrature
    celtique.

atrick Weston oyce.A SOIA ISTO OF ANINT IAND, treating
    of the overnment, Military System, and aw; eligion, earning,
    and Art; Trades, Industries, and ommerce; Manners, ustoms, and
    Domestic ife of the Ancient Irish eople.  vols. ondon, .

harles I. lton, F.S.A.OIINS OF NIS ISTO. Second edition,
    revised. ondon, .

ohn hys.TI BITAIN. arly Britain Series. ondon, .

. dArbois de ubainville.INTODTION  TD D A ITTAT
    TI. ol. I of the ours de ittrature celtique. aris,
    .

    ontains, among other information, the fullest and most
    authentic account of the druids and druidism.


                            AI MTOO

. dArbois de ubainville.  MTOOI IANDAIS T A
    MTOOI TI. ol. II of the ours de ittrature
    celtique. aris, . Translated into nglish as

  T IIS MTOOIA  AND TI MTOO. With notes by
    . I. Best. Dublin, .

    An account of Irish mythical history and of some of the greater
    aelic gods. With chapters on some of the more striking phases
    of eltic belief.

Alfred Nutt.T OA OF BAN, SON OF FBA. An Irish istoric
    egend of the eighth century. dited by uno Meyer. With essays
    upon the appy Otherworld in Irish Myth and upon the eltic
    Doctrine of ebirth. ol. IThe appy Otherworld. ol. IIThe
    eltic Doctrine of ebirth. rimm ibrary, ols. I and I.
    ondon, -.

    ontains, among other notable contributions to the study of
    eltic mythology, an enquiry into the nature of the Tuatha D
    Danann, a subect briefly treated in the same authors

  T FAI MTOO OF SASA. No.  of opular Studies in
    Mythology, omance, and Folklore. ondon, .

atrick Weston oyce.OD TI OMANS. Translated from the
    aelic. ondon, .

    A retelling in popular modern style of some of the more
    important mythological and Fenian stories.

ady regory.ODS AND FITIN MN. The story of the Tuatha D
    Danann and of the Fianna of rin. Arranged and put into nglish
    by ady regory. With a reface by W. B. eats. ondon, .

    overs much the same ground as Mr. oyces book, but in more
    literary manner.

Alfred Nutt.OSSIAN AND T OSSIANI ITAT. No.  of opular
    Studies in Mythology, omance, and Folklore. ondon, .

    A short survey of the literature connected with the Fenians.

ohn regorson ampbell, Minister of Tiree.T FIANS. Stories,
    poems, and traditions of Fionn and his Warrior Band,
    collected entirely from oral sources. With introduction and
    bibliographical notes by Alfred Nutt. ol. I of Waifs and
    Strays of eltic Tradition. ondon, .

    An account of the Fenians from the Scottish-aelic side.

Alfred Nutt.AINN T IIS AIS. No.  of opular
    Studies in Mythology, omance, and Folklore. ondon, .

    A brief but ecellent introduction to the uchulainn cycle.

ady regory.AIN OF MITMN. The story of the Men of the
    ed Branch of lster. Arranged and put into nglish by ady
    regory. With a reface by W. B. eats. ondon, .

    A retelling in poetic prose of the tales connected with
    uchulainn.

leanor ull.T IN SAA IN IIS ITAT. Being a
    collection of stories relating to the ero uchullin, translated
    from the Irish by various scholars. ompiled and edited with
    introduction and notes by leanor ull. With Map of Ancient
    Ireland. rimm ibrary, ol. III. ondon, .

    A series of uchulainn stories from the ancient Irish
    manuscripts. More literal than ady regorys adaptation.

. dArbois de ubainville.O TI N IAND. ol.  of
    the ours de ittrature celtique. aris, .

    A collection, translated into French, of some of the principal
    stories of the uchulainn cycle, with various appendices upon
    aelic mythological subects.

. Winifred Faraday, M.A.T ATT AID OF AN Tain Bo
    uailgne. An old Irish prose-epic translated for the first time
    from the eabhar na h-idhri and the ellow Book of ecan. rimm
    ibrary, ol. I. ondon, .

    A strictly literal rendering of the central episode of the
    uchulainn cycle.


                           BITIS MTOO

Ivor B. ohn.T MABINOION. No.  of opular Studies in
    Mythology, omance, and Folklore. ondon, .

    A pamphlet introduction to the Mabinogion literature.

ady harlotte uest.T MABINOION. From the Welsh of the F
    O O ST the ed Book of ergest in the library of esus
    ollege, Oford. Translated, with notes, by ady harlotte
    uest.

      First edition. Tet, translation, and notes,  vols., .
                     Translation and notes only,  vol., .
                     The Boys Mabinogion, .

    heap editions of this classic have been lately issued. One may
    obtain it in Mr. Nutts handsome little volume; as one of Dents
    Temple lassics; or in the Welsh ibrary.

. oth.S MABINOION, traduits en entier pour la premire fois en
    franais avec un commentaire eplicatif et des notes critiques.
     vols. ols. III and I of De ubainvilles ours de
    ittrature celtique. aris, .

    A more eact translation than that of ady uest, with notes
    embodying more recent scholarship.

. A. iles, D...OD NIS ONIS, including ... eoffrey
    of Monmouths British istory, ildas, Nennius ... dited, with
    illustrative notes, by . A. iles, D... Bohns Antiquarian
    ibrary. ondon, .

    The most accessible edition of eoffrey of Monmouth.

Sir Thomas Malory.T MOT DAT. dited by Dr. . Oskar Sommer.
    ol. Ithe Tet. ol. IIlossary, Inde, c. ol. IIIStudy on
    the Sources. ondon, -.

    ol. I of this, the best tet of the Morte Darthur, can be
    obtained separately.

essie . Weston.IN AT AND IS NITS. A survey of Arthurian
    romance. No.  of opular Studies in Mythology, omance, and
    Folklore. ondon, .

Alfred Nutt.T NDS OF T O AI. No.  of opular
    Studies in Mythology, omance, and Folklore. ondon, .

    seful introductions to a more special study of Arthurian
    literature.


                 OMAATI STD OF TI MTOO

ohn hys.TS ON T OIIN AND OWT OF IION AS
    ISTATD B TI ATNDOM. The ibbert ectures for
    . ondon, .

ohn hys.STDIS IN T ATIAN ND. Oford, .

    These two volumes are the most important attempts yet made
    towards a scientific and comprehensive study of the eltic
    mythology.


                       TI FAI AND FO O


                                 AI

T. rofton roker.FAI NDS AND TADITIONS OF T SOT OF
    IAND.

    This book is one of the earliest, and, if not the most
    scientific, perhaps the most attractive of the many collections
    of Irish fairy-lore. ater compilations are Mr. William
    arminies

    West Irish Folktales and omances, and Mr. eremiah urtins
    ero Tales of Ireland, Myths and Folklore of Ireland, and
    Tales of the Fairies, collected in South Munster. On the
    Scotch side, notice should be particularly taken of ampbells
    opular Tales of the West ighlands and the volumes entitled
    Waifs and Strays of eltic Tradition. All these books are
    either recent or recently republished, and are merely selected
    out of a large list of works, valuable and otherwise, upon this
    lighter side of eltic mythology.


                                BITIS

ohn hys.TI FOO, WS AND MAN.  vols. Oford, .

Wirt Sikes.BITIS OBINS: Welsh Folklore, Fairy Mythology,
    egends, and Traditions. By Wirt Sikes, nited States onsul for
    Wales. ondon, .


                     FOO OMAATI TATD

eorge aurence omme.TNOO IN FOO. Modern Science
    Series. ondon, .

    An attempt to assign apparently non-Aryan beliefs and customs
    in the British islands to pre-Aryan inhabitants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 IND


 Aberffraw, marriage of Branwen at, .
 Abergeleu, sacred well at, .
 Achill Island, folk-tales preserved at, .
 Achilles, the Irish, .
 Achren, battle of, , ;
   castle of, .
 Acrisius, .
 Adamnans ife of Saint olumba, , .
 Advocates ibrary at dinburgh, , .
 Aebh, wife of r, .
 Aed, son of r, .
 Aedh, son of Miodhchaoin, .
 Aeife, wife of r, , , .
 Aerfon, a title of the river Dee, .
 s Sdhe, the folk of the mounds, the gods or fairies, , .
 Africa, , , , .
 Aganippus, king of the Franks, , .
 Agriculture god of, British, ;
   a aulish, .
 Ailbhe, foster-daughter of Bodb the ed, .
 Aileach, grave of Nuada at, , .
 Ailill, king of onnaught, , , , , , , .
 Ailinn, love-story of, , .
 Ailioll of Arran, .
 Ain, queen of the fairies of South Munster, -.
 Ainle, one of the sons of snach, , , .
 Airceltrai, the sdh of Ogma, , .
 Airem, ochaid, high king of Ireland, , , , , , , ,
    .
 Airem, meaning of the word, , .
 Airmid, daughter of Diancecht, , , , .
 Alator, a war-god worshipped in Britain, .
 Alaw, river in Anglesey, , .
 Alba, , , , , , , , ;
   Deirdres farewell to, -.
 Albania, a name for Alba, .
 Ale of oibniu, .
 Allobroges, , .
 Amaethon, son of Dn, British god of Agriculture, , , , ,
    , ;
   fights against Brn in the battle of Achren, -;
   assists ulhwch to win Olwen, .
 Amergin, druid of the Milesians, -.
 Amesbury, castle of, .
 Amlwch, stream of, .
 Ana, see Anu.
 Ancient Britons, who were the, -.
 Aneurin, a sith-century British bard, , , .
 Aneurin, the Book of, .
 Anglesey, island of, , , , , .
 Anglo-Saon, our descent not entirely, .
 Anguish, Anguissance, king of Ireland, .
 Angus, aelic god of love and beauty, , , , , , -,
    , , , , -, , , , ;
   his attributes, ;
   his wooing of aer, -;
   cheats his father, the Dagda, ;
   steals tain from Mider, ;
   helps Diarmait and rainne, , , ;
   matches his pigs against the Fenians, -.
 Anicetus, Sol Apollo, a omano-British god, .
 Animals, sacred, , , ;
   sacrifices of, , , , .
 Anna, sister of Arthur, .
 Annals of the Four Masters, .
 Annwn, the British Otherworld, , , -, , , , ,
    , , , .
 Annwn, the Spoiling of, a poem by Taliesin, , , , .
 Anu, or Ana, a aelic goddess of prosperity and abundance, ;
   the aps of Ana, ;
   still living in folklore as Aynia and Ain, .
 Aoibhinn, queen of the fairies of North Munster, .
 Aoife, an Amazon defeated by uchulainn, , , .
 Aphrodit, the British, , .
 Apollo, the aelic, ;
   the British, ;
   a temple of, in Britain, , .
 Apples, of the arden of the esperides, , , ;
   in the eltic lysium, , .
 Apple-tree of Ailenn, .
 Aquitani, .
 Aranon, son of Mil, .
 Arawn, king of Annwn, , , , , , , , , , ,
    .
 Ardan, a son of snach, , , .
 Ard hein, .
 Arddu, Black Stone of, .
 Ars, .
 Argetlm, , .
 Arianrod, a British goddess, -, , , , , ;
   her place in later legend taken by Arthurs sister, .
 Armagh, , .
 Arnold, Matthew, , , .
 Arran, Isle of, , , .
 Art, the onely, king of Tara, , .
 Artaius, Mercurius, a aulish god, .
 Arthur, , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , -, , , , , , , -, ,
    , -, , -, , , -, , ;
   the mythical and the historical, , ;
   assumes the attributes of wydion, ;
   the Spoiling of Annwn by, -;
   becomes head of the British antheon, -;
   wins Olwen for ulhwch, -;
   in eoffrey of Monmouths istory, , ;
   leads the Wild unt, .
 Arthurian egend, Studies in the, rofessor hyss, , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 Artur, son of Nemed, .
 Aryans, , , , ;
   common traditions of the, , , ;
   Aryan languages, .
 Astarte, worshipped at orbridge, .
 Astolat, .
 Athens, .
 Athlone, , .
 Augusel, a king of Scotland, .
 Aurelius, a British king, .
 Avallach, see Avallon.
 Avallon, a British god of the nderworld, , ;
   Isle of, , and see Avilion.
 Avebury, the castle of, .
 Avilion, , , , , , , , .
 Aynia, a fairy queen of lster, .

 Babylon, .
 Badb, a aelic war-goddess, , , , , , ;
   the name often used generically, ;
   description of a, .
 Badger in the bag, the game of, , .
 Badon, battle of, .
 Baile, love-story of, -.
 Bailes Strand, , .
 Baocassus, Temple of the sun-god Belinus at, .
 Bala lake, .
 Balan, , , .
 Balder, .
 Balgatan, a mountain near ong, .
 Balin, , , , .
 Ballymagauran, village of, .
 Ballymote, Book of, , , , , , .
 Ballysadare, .
 Balor, a king of the Fomors, -, , , , , , , , ,
    -, , , , , ;
   his evil eye, ;
   kills Nuada and Macha, ;
   is blinded by ugh, ;
   tales of, in modern folklore, -.
 Balors ill, , .
 Ban, king of Benwyk, , , .
 Banba, a goddess representing Ireland, ;
   an ancient name of Ireland, , .
 Banshee, meaning of the word, .
 Baoisgne, lann, , .
 Bards, , .
 Bardsey Island, .
 Barrow, river, how it got its name, .
 Barrule, South, .
 Barry, the, .
 Basque race, .
 Bath, , , , , .
 Bathursts oman Antiquities in ydney ark, .
 Battle of Achren, ;
   of Badon, ;
   of amlan, , , , , , ;
   of lontarf, ;
   of abhra, , , , ;
   of Mag ath, ;
   of Moytura Northern, -, ;
   of Moytura Southern, -;
   of the Trees, , -.
 Bayeu, temple of Belinus at, .
 Bean, curious passage relating to the, , .
 Becuma of the Fair Skin, .
 Bedivere, Sir, .
 Bedwini, Arthurs bishop, .
 Bedwyr, a follower of Arthur, , , .
 Belacatudor, a war-god worshipped in Britain, .
 Belg, , .
 Beli, a British god, , , , , , , -.
 Belinus, a eltic sun-god, , , ;
   as a king of Britain, , , .
 Belisama, the atin name of the ibble, .
 Beltaine, the aelic May-day, , , , , , , .
 Berber race, .
 Beth, an Iberian god, .
 Bettws-y-coed, .
 Beuno, Saint, sacrifices of cattle to, .
 Big-nife, Osla, , .
 Bil, father of the aelic gods and men, , , , , , .
 Billingsgate, origin of name, .
 Birds, of hiannon, the, , , ;
   Dechtir and her maidens changed into, .
 Black Book of aermarthen, the, , , , , .
 Bladud, mythical founder of Bath, .
 Blathnat, daughter of Mider, , .
 Bliant, astle, .
 Blodeuwedd, wife of leu law yffes, , , .
 Blood-fines among the elts, ;
   blood-fine paid for ian, -.
 Boann, wife of the Dagda, , , .
 Boar, wild, of Bengulben, ;
   the Boar Trwyth, -.
 Bodb the ed, son of the Dagda, , , , -, , , ;
   is made king of the Tuatha D Danann, ;
   his swineherd, ;
   marries his daughter Sadb to Finn, .
 Bogles, , , .
 Bonfires in eltic ritual, -.
 Bordeau, Sir uon of, .
 Boread, .
 Borrach, , , .
 Bors, king of aul, .
 Bors, Sir, , .
 Boyne, river, , , , , , , , , .
 Brahmans, .
 Bran, son of Febal, an Irish king, , , .
 Bran, Finns favourite hound, .
 Brn, British god of the nderworld, , -, , -, ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , ;
   fights the battle of Achren, ;
   becomes the Wonderful ead, ;
   in eoffrey of Monmouths istory, , ;
   in the Morte Darthur, , ;
   introduces hristianity into Britain, .
 Brandegore, ing, , .
 Brandegoris, ing, .
 Brandel, Brandiles, Sir, .
 Branwen, British goddess of love, , -, .
 Brazil, .
 Brea, ford of, Finn killed at the, .
 Breasals Island, .
 Brcilien, Forest of, .
 Bregon, .
 Brennius, a mythical British king, , , , .
 Brennus, .
 Bress, son of lathan, a Fomor, , -, , , , -, -,
    ;
   his beauty, ;
   marries Brigit, and is made king over the Tuatha D Danann, ;
   is forced to abdicate, ;
   makes war on the Tuatha D Danann, ;
   is defeated and captured, -.
 Brian, son of Tuirenn, , , , , -, , , .
 Briareus, .
 Bridge of the liff, the, .
 Bridget, Saint, , , .
 Brigantes, a North British tribe, .
 Brigantia, a British Minerva, .
 Brigindo, a aulish goddess, .
 Brigit, aelic goddess of fire, poetry, and the hearth, , , ,
    , , , , ;
   is married to Bress, ;
   is canonized as Saint Bridget, , .
 Bri eith, the sdh of Mider, , , , .
 Brindled o, the, .
 Britain, ancient names of, , .
 British oblins, Mr. Wirt Sikes, , , .
 Britons, ancient, who were the, -.
 BITONM, ISTOIA. See istoria, eoffrey, Nennius.
 Brittany, .
 Briun, son of Bethar, .
 Brownies, , , .
 Brude, king of the icts, .
 Brugh-na-boyne, , , , , .
 Brutus, , .
 Brythons, , , , , .
 Buarainech, father of Balor, .
 Buinne, the uthless ed, son of Fergus, , , .
 Bull, the Brown, of ualgne, , , , ;
   the White-horned, of onnaught, , .
 Bwbachod, .

 adbury, the supposed site of amelot, .
 ader Idris, .
 aemhoc, Saint, .
 aer, daughter of tal Ambuel, .
 aer Arianrod, , .
 aer Badus, .
 aer Bannawg, .
 aer olvin, .
 aer Dathyl, , .
 aer olud, .
 aer lyr, .
 aer ondon, .
 aer Myrddin, .
 aer Ochren, .
 aer edryvan, , , .
 aer igor, .
 aer Sarrlog, .
 aer Sidi, , , , .
 aer andwy, , .
 aer edwyd, .
 aer Wydyr, .
 aesar, ulius, , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , .
 airbr, son of ormac, , , .
 airn of Octriallach, .
 airpr, son of Ogma, bard of the Tuatha D Danann, , , , , .
 alais, .
 alatin the wizard, , ;
   daughters of alatin, -.
 aledonians, .
 amelot, , .
 amlan, battle of, , , , , , .
 amulodunum, the oman name of olchester, .
 amulus, a aulish god of war and the sky, , , , .
 aoilte, a Fenian hero, , , , , , , , .
 aractacus, aratacus, , , .
 aradawc of the Strong Arms, son of Brn, , , , , , .
 arbonek, , .
 armarthen, .
 arnac, .
 arnarvon, .
 arrowmore, .
 assibellawn, assivelaunus, .
 assiopeias hair, .
 astell y Moch, .
 astle of Arianrod, , .
 astle Bliant, .
 astle of wydion, .
 astle acket, .
 astle of evelry, , .
 astle of iches, .
 astles, eltic, .
 aswallawn, son of Beli, .
 ath odeu. See the Battle of the Trees.
 athbad, druid of main Macha, , , , , , , , .
 athubodva, a aulish war-goddess, .
 auldrons in eltic mythology; the Dagdas, , , ;
   of Ogyrvran the iant, ;
   of Diwrnach the ael, , ;
   cauldron given by Brn to Matholwch, , , ;
   cauldron stolen from Mider by uchulainn, , ;
   cauldron kept in Annwn by the chief of ades, , , ;
   the legend of the oly rail founded upon eltic myths of a cauldron
      of fertility and inspiration, -.
 elt, .
 eltic mythical literature the forerunner of medival romance, .
 eltic strain in modern nglishmen, .
 elts, the, , , , -, , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , .
 emmes, a parish in embrokeshire, .
 enn ruaich, .
 ermait, i.e. oney-mouth, a title of Ogma, .
 eth, son of Diancecht, , .
 ethlenn, wife of Balor, .
 hain, ughs, ;
   chiefs, .
 hampion of the Tuatha D Danann, , ;
   hampions of the ed Branch, see ed Branch;
   The hampions rophecy, .
 hariots, war, of the elts, , , .
 haron, .
 haucer, , .
 hess, Miders game with ochaid Airem, ;
   Ossians game with Finn, .
 hildren of Dn, Nudd, and lyr, .
 hristianity, introduced into Britain by Brn, , ;
   conquers Druidism, , ;
   adopts harmless heathen cults, , .
 ian, son of Diancecht, , , , , -, , -, , ,
    , .
 iaran, Saint, .
 ichol the Footless, a Fomor, .
 ilgwri, the Ousel of, .
 lann Baoisgne, , , :
 lan hattan, .
 lann Morna, , , , .
 lann Neamhuinn, , .
 lann onan, .
 las Myrddin, an old name for Britain, .
 laudius, oman emperor, .
 liodna, fairy queen of Munster, .
 lontarf, battle of, .
 ld, goddess of the river lyde, , .
 luricanes, .
 noc Miodhchaoin, .
 nucha, battle of, .
 oblynau, .
 ocidius, a war-god worshipped by a Dacian colony in umberland, .
 oed elen, .
 oel, a mythical king of Britain, , .
 oir Anmann, the hoice of Names, an old Irish tract, , , ,
    , .
 olchester, .
 ole, Old ing, .
 ollen, Saint, , , .
 olumba, Saint, , , , .
 omes Britanni, .
 omes ittoris Saonici, .
 omyn, Michael, a aelic poet, .
 onair the reat, high king of Ireland, , .
 onall the ictorious, , , , , , , .
 onan, a Fenian hero, , .
 onann, son of Febar, a king of the Fomors, .
 onchobar, king of lster, , , -, , -, -, ,
    , , , -, , -, , , , ;
   his treachery towards the sons of snach, -;
   his tragical death, .
 ondates, a war-god worshipped in Britain, .
 ong, village of, , .
 onlaoch, son of uchulainn, , .
 onn the undred Fighter, , .
 onn, son of r, .
 onn, son of Miodhchaoin, .
 onnaught, , , , , .
 onnla, son of onn the undred Fighter, .
 ontemporary eview, the, .
 ontrary ead, .
 onway, river, .
 ooking-places of the Fenians, .
 ooking-spits of the women of Fianchuiv, ;
   at Tara, .
 ooley, see ualgne.
 oranians, a mythical tribe of dwarfs, -.
 orb, an Iberian god, .
 orbridge, .
 orc, son of Miodhchaoin, .
 orca-Duibhne, .
 orca-Oidce, .
 ordeilla, daughter of eir, in eoffrey of Monmouths istory,
    -.
 ordelia, daughter of Shakespeares ing ear, , .
 oritiacus, a war-god worshipped in Britain, .
 ormac, the Magnificent, , , , , , , .
 ornwall, , , , , , , , , .
 oronation Stone, the, .
 orrib, see ough orrib.
 orspitium, see orbridge.
 orwenna, mother of Brennius and Belinus, .
 ount of Britain, ;
   of the Saon Shore, .
 ourt of Dn, the, , .
 ow, Balors ray, , , , ;
   Miders three cows, , .
 ow, Book of the Dun, , , , , , , , , , .
 redn, the bronze-worker of the Tuatha D Danann, , , .
 rete, .
 reudylad, daughter of the British sky-god ludd, , , , ,
    , , .
 riminal esolutions of Britain, the Three, .
 rom roich, .
 romm ruaich, , , , , .
 ronos, , , .
 roppies rave, the, at Tara, .
 ruind, the river, .
 u, son of Diancecht, , .
 ualgne, a province of lster, , , .
 uan, head of the Munster Fenians, .
 uchulainn, chief hero of the ltonians, , , , , , , ,
    -, , , , , , , , , , ;
   is the son of ugh, -;
   obvious solar character of, -;
   how he obtained his name, -;
   fights in the Tin B huailgne, -;
   his wooing of mer, -;
   his raid upon the Other World, -;
   his death, ;
   is raised from the dead by Saint atrick, .
 ulann, chief smith of the ltonians, ;
   ulanns ound, , .
 ulture-ing, .
 umhal, father of Finn, , , , .
 unedda, a North British king, .
 unobelinus, king of Britain, .
 uroi, king of Munster, , , .
 ustennin, , .
 uthbert, Saint, bulls sacrificed to, .
 wm awlwyd, the Owl of, .
 wm Annwn, the ounds of ell, , .
 wy, .
 ymbeline, Shakespeares, .
 ymri, , .

 Dagda, the, aelic god of the arth, , , , , , -, ,
    , , , , , -, , , , , , , ,
    , , , ;
   his dress, arms, and harp, ;
   his porridge-feast, ;
   is cheated by his son Angus, ;
   resigns the kingship of the Tuatha D Danann, ;
   his last appearance, .
 Daire of ualgne, owner of the Brown Bull, .
 Daln, druid of ochaid Airem, .
 Danes, the, .
 Danu, the mother of the aelic gods, the same as Anu, q.v., , ,
    , , , , .
 Dart, river, .
 Dartmoor, .
 Darvha, ake, -.
 Deaf alley, the, .
 Dechtir, mother of uchulainn, , , , .
 D Danann, see Tuatha D Danann.
 Dee, river, .
 Deimne, the first name of Finn, .
 Deirdre, -;
   Deirdres Farewell to Alba, -;
   Deirdres ament over the Sons of snach, -.
 Demetia, oman province of, , .
 Demetrius, an early traveller in Britain, .
 Demon of the air, Aeife changed into a, .
 Derivla, a sacred well in the island of Inniskea, .
 Desmond, fourth arl of, nicknamed the Magician, .
 Destiny, laying a, a eltic custom, -, .
 Devon, , .
 Devwy, the dales of, .
 Dialogue of the lders, the, , , ;
   Dialogues of atrick and Ossian, -.
 Diancecht, the aelic god of medicine, , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , ;
   makes a silver hand for Nuada, ;
   kills his son Miach, -;
   presides over the Spring of ealth, ;
   prescriptions of Diancecht, .
 Diarmait ODuibhne, the Fenian Adonis, , , -, .
 Dinadan, Sir, .
 Dinas Dinllev, .
 Dinas mrys, , .
 Dingwall, egisters of the resbytery of, .
 Dinnsenchus, , , , .
 Dio assius, .
 Diodorus Siculus, , , .
 Dionysus, rites of, .
 Dis ater, , , , .
 Dissull the iant, -.
 Diwrnach the ael, the cauldron of, , .
 Dobhar, king of Sicily, , , , .
 Doctrine of the transmigration of souls, , .
 Domnann, Fir, i.e. men of Domnu. See Fir Domnann.
 Domnu, a goddess, mother of the Fomors, , , ;
   meaning of the name, ;
   gods of Domnu, , ;
   men of Domnu, .
 Dn, the British equivalent of the aelic Danu, , , , , ,
    , , , , ;
   euhemerized into a king of Dublin, -.
 Donn, son of Mil, -, .
 Donns ouse, .
 Dormarth, the hound of wyn son of Nudd, .
 Dowth, -.
 Dragon, ed, of Britain, ;
   White, of the Saons, .
 Dragon-mouth, a lake called, .
 Dream of honabwy, the, , , , .
 Drogheda, .
 Drowes, river, .
 Drudwyn, the whelp of reid the son of ri, .
 Druidism, the religion of the elts, , ;
   possibly non-Aryan in origin, ;
   in aul, ;
   derived from Britain, ;
   suppressed by the omans, , .
 Druids, , -, , , , , , , , , , -,
    , , ;
   origin of the name, ;
   in aul, ;
   in Britain, ;
   human sacrifices of the druids, , ;
   the druids of Brude, king of the icts, .
 Drumcain, an old name for Tara, .
 Dublin, , .
 Duke of the Britains, the, .
 Dulachan, , .
 Dul-dauna, the, .
 Dun ow, Book of the. See ow.
 Dundalk, .
 Dundealgan, , , , .
 Dn Scaith, -.
 Du Britanniarum. See Duke of the Britains.
 Dwynwen, Saint, .
 Dyfan, Saint, .
 Dyfed, or Demetia, a province of South Wales, , , , , ,
    , -, , , , , .
 Dylan, a British god, , , , , , , .

 agle, of wern Abwy, ;
   leu changed into an, -.
 arl erald, .
 asal, king of the olden illars, , .
 ber, son of Mil, -, , .
 ber Scot, .
 boracum, oman name of ork, .
 deyrn, son of Nudd, .
 dinburgh, the Advocates ibrary at, .
 el, the Morrg takes the shape of an, ;
   transformation of the rival swineherds into eels, .
 gypt, .
 igen, the first female saint in Britain, .
 ildon ills, Arthur living beneath the, .
 laine, .
 lathan, a king of the Fomors, , , , , , , .
 layne, .
 lberich, .
 lders, Dialogue of the. See Dialogue.
 len wyddawg, wife of Myrddin, , .
 leutherius, ope, .
 llylion, the Welsh elves, .
 ltons Origins of nglish istory, , , , , , , , .
 lves, .
 lysium, eltic. See Other World, eltic.
 main Macha, the capital of ancient lster, , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , .
 mer, wife of uchulainn, , , , -.
 mer, the Wooing of, an old Irish saga, , , , .
 mperor, a title given in Welsh legend to Arthur, , .
 mrys, a title of Myrddin, , , , .
 nglishmen, eltic strain in, .
 ntertaining of the Noble ead, the, .
 ochaid, son of rc, king of the Fir Bolgs, , , , .
 ochaid Airem, see Airem.
 ochaid OFlynn, an Irish poet, .
 rc, king of Tara, , , .
 remon, son of Mil, and first king of Ireland, , , , , ,
    , , .
 rin, , , , , , , , , ;
   meaning of the word, .
 riu, a goddess representing Ireland, , , , .
 ros, the aelic, , .
   See Angus.
 ssyllt, wife of March, or Mark. See Iseult.
 tain, wife of Mider, , , -, , , -.
 tair, a vassal of ing onchobar, .
 tal Ambuel, father of aer, .
 tan, wife of Ogma, , , .
 thnea, a name of thniu in modern folklore, .
 thniu, daughter of Balor, , , , , , .
 thnology in Folklore, Mr. . . ommes, , , , , , .
 tirun, an idol of the Britons, .
 tive, och, .
 truscans, the, ; truscan mythology in modern Italian folklore, .
 ttard, .
 ttarre, elleas and, Tennysons idyll of, .
 uhemerism of aelic gods, -;
   of British gods, -.
 uskarian race, .
 velake, ing, .
 vnissyen, son of enardun, , , .

 Failinis, the hound of the king of Ioruaidh, , , .
 Fairie ueene, Spensers, , .
 Fairies, the, , , -, -, , , , ;
   the old gods are remembered as fairies, -, -;
   two varieties of fairy in folklore, ;
   Irish and Welsh fairies identical in nature, ;
   king of the Irish fairies, ;
   king of the Welsh fairies, ;
   size of the fairies, ;
   fairy money, ;
   fairy food, ;
   the fairy hills, -, .
 Fal, the stone of. See Stone of Destiny.
 Falcon of May, ;
   Falcon of Summer, .
 Falga, Isle of, , .
 Falias, a city of the Tuatha D Danann, , .
 Fand, wife of Manannn son of r, -, .
 Faraday, Miss, her translation of the Tin B huailgn, .
 Fata Morgana, .
 Fate of the hildren of r, -;
   of the Sons of Tuirenn, -;
   of the Sons of snach, -.
 Fea, a war-goddess, wife of Nuada, .
 Feast of Age, Manannns, , , .
 Feast of ugh, see ugnassad.
 Feast of St. ohn, .
 Fecs ool, on the Boyne, .
 Fedlimid, vassal to ing onchobar, .
 Fenians, the, , , , , -, -, -, -, ,
    , , ;
   real or mythical, -;
   origin of, ;
   duties of, ;
   accomplishments of, ;
   chief heroes of, -;
   destruction of, at the battle of abhra, ;
   stories of, -;
   the Fenian sagas possibly non-Aryan, .
 Fenius Farsa, .
 Ferdiad, a warrior slain by uchulainn, , , .
 Fergus, son of Finn, .
 Fergus, son of oy, an lster hero, , , , , , ,
    -, , .
 Fergusson, Dr. ames, , , , .
 Festivals, eltic solar or agricultural, -.
 Ffordd len, .
 Fiacha, son of onchobar, , .
 Fiachadh, king of Ireland, .
 Fiachra, son of r, .
 Fianchuiv, submarine island of, , .
 Fianna irinn, see Fenians.
 Figol, son of Mamos, druid of the Tuatha D Danann, .
 Findabair, daughter of Medb, .
 Findias, a city of the Tuatha D Danann, , .
 Finn mac oul umhail, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , -, -, , , , , , , ;
   his upbringing and boy-feats, -;
   reorganizes the Fenians, ;
   is killed at the Ford of Brea, ;
   is reborn as Mongan, an lster chief, ;
   is he historical or mythical, ;
   parallels between Finn and Arthur, -.
 Finn mac orman, compiler of the Book of einster, .
 Finn the Seer, .
 Finola, daughter of r, .
 Finvarra, king of the Irish fairies, , , .
 Fiona Macleod, Miss, .
 Fionn, see Finn.
 Fionnbharr, the sdh of Meadha assigned to, ;
   his appearance in the Fenian sagas, ;
   becomes fairy king of Ireland, .
 Fir Bolgs, an Iberian tribe, -, -, , , , , .
 Fir Domnann, an Iberian tribe, -, , .
 Fir aillion, an Iberian tribe, -, .
 Fish, sacred, .
 Fly, tain changed into a, ;
   ugh takes the form of a, ;
   a sacred, .
 Folklore, thnology in. See thnology.
 Folk-tales, Irish, -; Welsh, .
 Fomors, aelic deities of Death, Darkness, and the Sea, , -, ,
    , , , , , , , , -, , , , , ,
    , , , , , , ;
   meaning of the name, ;
   their war with the Tuatha D Danann, -;
   are the ochlannach in the Fenian sagas, .
 Forgall the Wily, father of mer, , , , .
 Fotla, a goddess representing Ireland, ;
   an ancient name of Ireland, .
 Four Ancient Books of Wales, the, , .
   See also Skene.
 Four Branches of the Mabinogi, the, , , , , , , .
 Four-cornered castle, the, .
 Frazers olden Bough, .
 Frivolous Battles of Britain, The Three, .
 Frogs, sacred, .
 Fury, reat, and ittle Fury, two swords of Manannn, , .

 abhra, battle of, , , , .
 abius, a oman consul, .
 abriel ounds, the, .
 ae bolg, uchulainns spear, , , .
 aels, , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    .
 aiar, son of Manannn, .
 aillion, Fir. See Fir aillion.
 alahad, Sir, , , .
 alan-mai, Welsh spring festival, .
 an eanach, .
 arden of the esperides, the, , , .
 argantua, abelais, .
 ast hymris cubs, , .
 aul, , , , , , .
 auls, the, , , , .
 avida, , .
 avideen o, .
 awain, Sir, , , , , .
 easa, taboos among the Irish elts, , , .
 enii locorum, .
 eoffrey of Monmouth, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , -, , .
 eorges ill, Saint, .
 eraint, , .
 ildas, a British writer, .
 lamour, the ealm of, an old name for Dyfed, .
 lamour put on uchulainn by athbad, ;
   by the daughters of alatin, , ;
   put on the sons of snach, ;
   on Arianrod, , ;
   on Dyfed, .
 lass astle, of the Fomors, ;
   a synonym for the other world, , .
 lastonbury, , .
 lastonbury Tor, , .
 lenn Faisi, .
 lora, Isle of, , , .
 lyn ch, , .
 obhan Saer, the, , , .
 oibniu, aelic god of smithcraft, , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , ;
   forges the weapons of the Tuatha D Danann, , ;
   kills uadan, ;
   his ale, ;
   survives in tradition as the obhan Saer, q.v.;
   as a character in folk-tale, -.
   See avida and avideen o.
 oidel, a mythical ancestor of the Irish, .
 oidels, the, , , , , .
 olden bough, the mistletoe the, .
 olden illars, king of the. See asal.
 oll, , , .
 omme, Mr. . ., , , , , , , .
 onorilla, daughter of eir, , .
 ore, . See ower.
 oreu, Arthurs cousin, , .
 orias, a city of the Tuatha D Danann, , , .
 ovannan son of Dn, British god of Smithcraft, , , , ;
   kills his nephew Dylan, ;
   assists ulhwch, .
 ower regarded as part of the other world, , , , .
 rail, the oly, , , , -, -.
 rainne, , -, .
 raves of the Warriors, the erses of the, , , .
 ray of Macha, uchulainns horse, , , , .
 reece, , , , , , , .
 reek mythology, ancient, , , ;
   modern, .
 reen Meadows of nchantment, the, .
 regory, ady, , .
 reid, the son of ri, , .
 resholm Island, , , .
 rianainech, the sunny-faced, an epithet of Ogma, .
 rianan Aileach, grave of Nuada at. See Aileach.
 ronw ebyr, , , .
 uanius, wyn as a mythical king of the uns, .
 uest, ady harlotte, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , .
 uinevere, Arthurs queen, , , , , , , .
 unvasius, king of the Orkneys, .
 urgiunt Brabtruc, king of Britain, .
 uyon, Sir, in Spensers Fairie ueene, , .
 walchaved, .
 walchmei, , , , , , , , , , , .
 wales, island of, , , .
 warthegyd, son of aw, .
 wawl, son of ld, wylls rival for hiannon, , , , , .
 weddw, owner of a magic horse, .
 weir, a form of the name wydion, q.v., , , .
 wenbaus, Sir, .
 wern, son of Matholwch and Branwen, , , .
 winas, Sir, .
 wlgawd ododin, the drinking-horn of, .
 wragedd Annwn, .
 wrhyr, a companion of Arthur, , , , .
 wri of the olden air, .
 wrnach the iant, , .
 wyar, wife of ludd, , , .
 wyddneu aranhir, his dialogue with wyn, -;
   his magic basket, .
 wyddolwyn orr, the magic bottles of, .
 wydion son of Dn, the British Mercury, -, , , -,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , ;
   druid of the gods, ;
   father of the sun-god, ;
   fights the Battle of the Trees, ;
   is the British equivalent of the Teutonic Woden, ;
   his place taken in later myth by Arthur, .
 wyl Awst, the Welsh August festival, .
 wyllion, .
 wyn son of Nudd, British god of the Other World, , -, , ,
    , , , , , , , , , -, , ;
   attributes of, ;
   his dialogue with wyddneu aranhir, -;
   contends with wyn for ludds daughter reudylad, ;
   is made warder of ades, -;
   prominent in the Arthur legend, ;
   becomes king of the Welsh fairies, ;
   his interview with Saint ollen, -.
 wynas, Sir, .
 wyngelli, a companion of Arthur, .
 wynhwyvar, , , -, , .
   See uinevere.
 wynn Mygddwn, the horse of weddw, .
 wynwas, a form of the name wyn, q.v., , .
 wyrd went, father of one of the three wynhwyvars, .
 wyrthur, son of reidawl, contends with wyn for reudylad, , ,
    , ;
   father of one of the three wynhwyvars, .

 acket, astle, .
 ades, the eltic. See Other World, eltic.
 ades, the reek god, , .
 ades, ead of, a name given to wyll, , .
 alloween, , , , .
 amitic languages, .
 appy lain, the, , , .
   See Mag Mell.
 are held sacred by the Ancient Britons, .
 arlech, , , , .
 arp of the Dagda, , ;
   of Angus, ;
   of Teirtu, .
 avgan, a king of Annwn, , .
 awthorn, chief of iants, father of Olwen, , , -, , .
 eifer, a black-maned, called Ocean, , , ;
   the Morrg takes the shape of a, -.
 engist, .
 enuinus, Duke of ornwall, , .
 ephstus, the aelic, , , .
 eracles, , .
 er, .
 ereford, .
 ergest, the ed Book of, , , , , , , .
 erimon, .
   See remon.
 ero-light, uchulainns, , .
 eros salmon-leap, uchulainns, .
 esiod, .
 esperides, garden of the. See arden.
 esus, a aulish god, .
 evydd the Ancient, father of hiannon, , .
 i Dorchaide, .
 ibbert ectures for  on eltic eathendom, rofessor hyss,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , .
 ill of isnech, , .
 istoria Britonum of Nennius, , ;
   of eoffrey of Monmouth, , , , , , , , , ,
      , , , .
 ittites, the, .
 oly Families of Britain, the Three hief, .
 oly rail, the. See rail.
 oly wells, -.
 omeric and eltic civilization compared, , .
 oodie-crow, , , , .
 orse of Manannn mac ir, , , ;
   of weddw, ;
   of wyn son of Nudd, , , .
 ound of ulann, the, , ;
   hound of ugh, ;
   of the king of Ioruaidh, ;
   hounds of Finn mac oul, ;
   hounds of eltic myth, , , , .
 ull, Miss leanor, her uchullin Saga, , , , , , ,
    .
 uman sacrifices of the Druids, , ;
   to romm ruaich, , , , ;
   symbolical, , , .
 uon of Bordeau, Sir, .
 uley, rofessor, .
 y-Breasail, .

 Iberians, the, , , , , , , , , , , , , ;
   their physique, ;
   language, ;
   original home, ;
   state of culture, ;
   gods, , , .
 Iddawc, the Agitator of Britain, , .
 Ilbhreach, son of Manannn, , , , .
 Iliad, the, , .
 Illann the Fair, son of Fergus mac oy, , -.
 Illusion, the and of, an old name for Dyfed, .
 Indech, son of Domnu, a king of the Fomors, , , , , , .
 Inniskea, the onely rane of, ;
   stone worship in, .
 Invasions, the Book of, .
 Ioldanach, the Master of All Arts, a title of ugh, , , ,
    .
 Iolo Morganwg, bardic name of Mr. dward Williams, .
 Iolo MSS., the, , , , , , , .
 Iona, Adamnan, Abbot of, .
 Ioruaidhe, , , .
 Ireland, old names of, , , .
   See also Iweridd.
 Iseult, wife of ing Mark, , .
 Island, submarine, , .
 Island of the Mighty, a bardic name for Britain, .
 Islands, sacred, .
 Ith, , ;
   Iths lain, , .
 Iuchar, son of Tuirenn, -.
 Iucharba, son of Tuirenn, -.
 Iweridd, i.e. Ireland, wife of the British sea-god lyr, , ,
    .

 anus, .
 avelin, ed, one of Manannns spears, , .
 ohn, Feast of Saint, , , .
 ones, the ev. dward, on apparitions, .
 oseph of Arimathea, , , .
 ubainville, M. . dArbois de, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , .
 udgment of Amergin, the, .
 ulius aesar, see aesar.

 acmwri, the servant of Arthur, , .
 aerlud, .
 ai, , , , , , , , .
 aritia, see alais.
 ay, Sir, , .
 eening invented, .
 elli Wic, .
 eltic esearches, Mr. Nicholsons, .
 enmare, river, .
 icva, wife of ryderi, -.
 ildare, shrine of St. Bridget at, .
 illaraus, Mount, .
 illarney, ake, , .
 ingly astle, see aer igor.
 irwans of astle acket, the, .
 nights, ing Arthurs, , , , , , , , .
 nockainy, .
 nockers, , .
 nockma, fairy hill of, , , .
 nockthierna, .
 nowth, , .
 ulhwch, , , , , , , .
 ulhwch and Olwen, the tale of, , , , , , , ,
    -, , .
 yndellig, .
 ynedyr Wyllt, , .

 abhra, Miders leech, .
 abraid of the uick and on Sword, .
 ady of the ake, .
 aeg, uchulainns charioteer, , , , .
 aegaire the Battle-winner, .
 akes, twelve chief, of Ireland, .
 amias, .
 ammas, .
 and of Illusion, ;
   of appiness, , ;
   of the iving, , ;
   of romise, , , ;
   of Summer, , ;
   of the oung, , .
 aon, .
 arminie, Mr. William, .
 auncelot, Sir, , , , , , , .
 ear, ing, Shakespeares, , , , , .
 ecan, the Book of, , , , ;
   the ellow Book of, , .
 eicester, , .
 einster, , .
 einster, Mount, , , .
 einster, the Book of, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 eir, eoffrey of Monmouths ing, -.
 eodogrance, father of uinevere, .
 eprechaun, , , , .
 r, the aelic sea-god, , , -, , , , , , ,
    ;
   his rebellion against Bodb the ed, ;
   their reconciliation, ;
   the fate of the children of, -;
   is killed by the Fenian hero aoilt, , .
 evarcham, .
 eyden, .
 ia Fil, see Stone of Destiny.
 iban, , .
 ismore, the Book of, .
 la luanys, the Man August festival, .
 lacheu, son of Arthur, , .
 landwynwyn, the church of Dwynwyn Branwen, in Anglesey, .
 leminawg, .
 leu lew law yffes, the British sun-god, -, , , ,
    , , , , , , , , ;
   his birth, ;
   and naming, ;
   takes part in the Battle of the Trees, ;
   is changed into an eagle, ;
   his place taken in later myth by walchmei, ;
   and in the Arthurian legend by Sir awain, .
 levelys, king of France, .
 loegyr oegria, Saon Britain, , , , .
 ludd law reint, the British eus, , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , -, ;
   his wife wyar, ;
   puts an end to the Three lagues of Britain, -;
   founds ondon, ;
   appears in the Morte Darthur as ing ot of Orkney, .
 lwyd, son of ilcoed, avenges wawl, son of ld, , .
 lwyr, son of lwyrion, the magic vessel of, .
 lyn lyw, the salmon of, .
 lyr, the British sea-god, , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , ;
   possibly borrowed from the aels, ;
   becomes the ing eir of eoffrey of Monmouth, ;
   and the ing ear of Shakespeare, , ;
   founds a family of saints, ;
   his tomb or temple at eicester, .
 lyr-cestre, , .
 lys Dn, , .
 lywarch n, a sith-century British poet, .
 och, a warrior slain by uchulainn, -.
 ochlann ochlin, , , ;
   ochlannach, the, , .
 ondon, , , , .
 ondres, .
 ot or oth, king of Orkney, , , .
 oucetius, a war-god worshipped in Britain, .
 ough orrib, its Shores and Islands, Sir William Wildes, .
 ough ur, .
 ucan, the oman poet, .
 uchtain, the carpenter of the Tuatha D Danann, , , , .
 ud, king of Britain, , , -.
 udesgata, udgate, , , .
 ugaid, son of uroi, , , .
 ugh amhfada, the aelic sun-god, -, -, -, , , ,
    -, -, , , , , , , , , ,
    -, , , , , , , , ;
   his spear, , , ;
   his hound, , ;
   his rod-sling and chain, ;
   his first appearance at Tara, ;
   gains the title of Ioldanach, ;
   avenges his fathers murder upon the sons of Tuirenn, -;
   leads the Tuatha D Danann against the Fomors, ;
   prophecies to onn the undred Fighter, .
 ugnassad, ughs ommemoration, , .
 ugudunum, town of ugus, , .
 ugus, the aulish sun-god, , , .
 undy Island, , .
 ydney, temple of Nodens at, ;
   monograph upon it, .
 yons, , .

 Mab, ueen, .
 Mabinogi, the Four Branches of the, , , .
 Mabinogion, , , , , , , , .
   See also uest, ady harlotte.
 Mabon, a British sun-god, , , , , , , -, .
 Macaulay, .
 Mac echt, a king of the Tuatha D Danann, , , , .
 Mac uill, a king of the Tuatha D Danann, , , , .
 Mac ee, Thomas DArcy, .
 Mac rein, a king of the Tuatha D Danann, , , , .
 Mac ineely, -.
 Mac Moineanta, a king of the Irish fairies, .
 Mac Nia, an old Irish poet, .
 Mac Oc, Son of the oung, a title of Angus, , .
 Machersons Ossian, .
 Mac Samthainn, .
 Macha, a war-goddess of the aels, , , ;
   meaning of her name, ;
   Machas acorn-crop, ;
   is killed by Balor, .
 Macleod, Miss Fiona, .
 Maelmuiri, scribe of the Book of the Dun ow, .
 Maelon, .
 Maenor Alun, ;
   Maenor enarth, .
 Maen Tyriawc, the grave of ryderi, .
 Maglaunus, Duke of Albania, , .
 Mag Mell, the appy lain, a name for the eltic lysium, , .
 Mag Mon, the lain of Sports, a name for the eltic lysium, .
 Mag Slecht, human sacrifices at, -, , .
 Mag Tuireadh, see Moytura.
 Magog, .
 Malory, Sir Thomas, , , , , -, -, , .
 Malvasius, king of Iceland, .
 Man, Isle of, , , , , , , , , , , .
 Manannn son of r, a aelic god, -, , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , -, ,
    -, , , ;
   his armour, , ;
   weapons, , ;
   horse, , , ;
   mantle, , , , , ;
   pigs, , ;
   his Feast of Age, , ;
   lord of the eltic aradise, ;
   his wife Fand in love with uchulainn, -;
   his friendship with ormac, king of Ireland, ;
   his message to Saint olumba, -;
   his connection with the Isle of Man, , -.
 Manawyddan son of lyr, his British analogue, , , , , ,
    , , , -, , , , , , , ;
   his attributes, -;
   accompanies Brn to Ireland, -;
   marries hiannon, ;
   defeats the magic of lwyd, son of ilcoed, -;
   constructs the bone-prison of Oeth and Anoeth, ;
   helps Arthur in the chase of Twrch Trwyth, .
 Maponos, a allo-British sun-god, , .
 March, a British god of the nder World, , , , , .
 Mark, ing, , .
 Mars, , .
 Master of All Arts, see Ioldanach.
 Mth, a British god, brother to Dn, , , , , , , ,
    , , , ;
   meaning of his name, ;
   teaches magic to wydion, ;
   rules from aer Dathyl, ;
   compared with Merlin, , , .
 Matholwch, king of Ireland, -.
 Mthonwy, father of Mth, , .
 Matire de Bretagne, the, , .
 Matthew Arnold, , , .
 May Day, , , , .
 May ve, , .
 Maypole, .
 Meadha, the sdh of, , , .
 Meath, .
 Medb, queen of onnaught, , , -, , , , , ,
    , , , ;
   makes war on lster to get the Brown Bull of ualgne, -;
   becomes a fairy queen, ;
   is perhaps the original of ueen Mab, .
 Mediterranean race, ;
   Mediterranean ace, The, rof. Sergis, .
 Medrawt, , , , , , , , .
 Meleaus, or Melias, de ile, Sir, .
 Melga, king of the icts, .
 Meliagaunce, or Meliagraunce, Sir, , , .
 Melwas, , , , , .
 Menai Straits, the, , .
 Menw, , , .
 Mercurius Artaius, a allo-oman god, , .
 Mercury, , .
 Merlin, , , , , , .
   See Myrddin.
 Mesgegra, king of einster, , .
 Meyer, Dr. uno, , , , , .
 Miach, son of Diancecht, , -, .
 Midas, the British, .
 Mider, aelic god of the nder World, , , , , , ,
    -, , , , , , -, , , -;
   rebels against Bodb the ed, ;
   gambles with ochaid Airem for possession of tain, ;
   is besieged in his sdh, and helped by the Fenians, -.
 Midsummer Day, , , .
 Midsummer ve, .
 Mil, the ancestor of the aels, , , , , , , , .
 Milesians, the, , -, , , , , , .
 Milky Way, the, , , .
 Minerva, , , .
 Minos, .
 Miodhchaoin, , , .
 Mistletoe, , .
 Mithras, a ersian sun-god worshipped at ork, .
 Mochdrev, .
 Mochnant, .
 Modron, wife of rien and mother of Mabon, , .
 Mona, see Anglesey.
 Mongan, an lster prince, a reincarnation of Finn mac oul, .
 Monmouth, eoffrey of. See eoffrey.
 Morc, son of Dela, a king of the Fomors, , .
 Mordred, Sir, , , , , , .
 Morgawse, sister to Arthur, .
 Morrg, the, aelic goddess of war, , , , , , , , ,
    , , -, ;
   description of, ;
   her dealings with uchulainn on the Tin B huailgne, -.
 Morte Darthur, Sir Thomas Malorys, , , , , , , ,
    , -, , .
 Mound, ord of the, , .
 Mountains of Ireland, the twelve chief, .
 Mourie, Saint, .
 Mouse, Manawyddan and the, -.
 Moyle, Sea of, , .
 Moytura, Northern, Battle of, , -, , ;
   Southern, Battle of, -, .
 Muirthemne, , , , .
 Munster, , , , , .
 Murias, a city of the Tuatha D Danann, , .
 Mur y astell, leus palace near Bala ake, , .
 Myrddin, a British eus, -, , , , ;
   gave its first name to Britain, ;
   his wife len, ;
   his town armarthen, ;
   appears in eoffrey of Monmouth and in the Morte Darthur as Merlin,
      q.v.
 Myrddin, a sith-century British bard, .
 Mythology, importance of, ;
   reek, , , , ;
   Scandinavian, ;
   eltic, its influence on nglish literature, , ;
   on medival chivalric romance, .

 Name, ancient British superstitions with regard to, .
 Names, hoice of, The. See oir Anmann.
 Names, early of Britain, , ;
   of Ireland, , , .
 Nant all, .
 Nant y lew, .
 Naoise, son of snach, -, -.
 Narberth, , , , , , , .
 Navan Fort, .
 Neamhuainn, lann, , .
 Neath, ale of, , , .
 Nedd, river, .
 Neevougi, a stone worshipped at Inniskea, .
 Nemed, -, ;
   the race of, , , , .
 Nemetona, a war-goddess worshipped at Bath, , .
 Nemon, a aelic war-goddess, wife of Nuada, , .
 Nennius, his istory of the Britons, , .
 Nentres, ing, , .
 Nereids, .
 Nt, an Iberian god, .
 New range, -.
 Nia, the lain of, .
 Niamh of the olden air, daughter of Manannn, -.
 Nicholsons eltic esearches, .
 Niebelungenlied, .
 Nimue, , , .
 Nissyen, son of enardun, , .
 Niul, .
 Noah, descent of the aelic gods and men from, .
 Nodens, a temple to, at ydney, .
 Northern rown, constellation of the, .
 Nos galan-gaeof, the Welsh winter festival, .
 Nuada of the Silver and, a aelic eus, , , , , , , ,
    -, , , , , , , , , ;
   his sword, , ;
   his wives, ;
   his hand cut off in battle, ;
   a silver hand made for him by Diancecht, ;
   his own hand renewed by Miach and Airmid, ;
   his death at the hands of Balor, ;
   his tomb at rianan Aileach, , .
 Nudd, British god, , , , ;
   to be identified with ludd, q.v.
 Nutt, Mr. Alfred, , , , , , , , , .
 Nwyvre, , .
 Nynniaw, son of Beli, , , .

 Oak, held sacred by the Druids, .
 Oberon, , .
 Ocean, a black-maned heifer called, , .
 Ochall Ochne, king of the Sdhe of onnaught, .
 Ochren, battle of, ;
   aer, ;
   see Achren.
 Octriallach, son of Indech, ;
   the airn of Octriallach, .
 Ourry, ugene, , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , .
 Odin, .
 ODonaghue, the, .
 ODonovan, .
 Oeth and Anoeth, the Bone-prison of, , , , .
 OFlynn, ochaid, an old Irish poet, .
 Ogam, writings in, , , , .
 Ogma, aelic god of iterature and loquence, -, , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , ;
   his wife and children, ;
   his epithets of ermait and rianainech, , ;
   his great strength, ;
   kills Indech in the battle of Moytura, ;
   inventor of the ogam alphabet, .
 Ogmios, a aulish god, .
 Orady, Standish ayes, Mr., , , , , , , , ,
    .
 Ogyrvran, a British god of the nder World, father of wynhwyvar,
    -, , .
 Oerlebys, wooden idol of the, .
 Old lain, the, .
 Old Sarum, , .
 Olwen, , , , , .
 Onagh, queen of the Irish fairies, , .
 Origins of nglish istory, Mr. ltons, , , , , , , ,
    .
 Orkneys, ;
   ing ot of Orkney, .
 Oscar, son of Ossian, , , , , , .
 Osla Big-nife, , .
 Ossian, Machersons, .
 Ossian, son of Finn mac oul, , , , , , , , -,
    , , .
 Ossianic ballads, , , ;
   Ossianic Society, see Transactions.
 Other World, the eltic, , , , , , , -, , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , -, , , , , , , ;
   different names of, , -;
   descriptions of, , -, ;
   variously imagined as upon the sea, , , , ;
   under the sea, ;
   under the earth, -;
   upon earth, , , , , ;
   original abode of men, ;
   visited by uchulainn, -, ;
   onn, ;
   onnla, ;
   Ossian, ;
   wyll, ;
   wydion, ;
   Arthur, -.
   See also Annwn, Avilion, appy lain, Mag Mell, Mag Mon, and of
      appiness, of the iving, of romise, of Summer, of the oung.
 Ousel of ilgwri, .
 Ovids Metamorphoses, .
 Owain, son of rien, , ;
   Sir Owain, .
 Owl, of wm awlwyd, ;
   Blodeuwedd changed into an, .
 O, the brindled, , ;
   oen, magic, .
 Oford, .

 aradise, the eltic.
   See Other World, eltic.
 arthludd, , .
 artholon, -, ; race of, , , .
 atrick, Saint, , , , , , , , , , , , .
 auls athedral, Saint, .
 ausaniass Description of reece, .
 edigree of the gods, ;
   of Finn mac oul, .
 edryvan, aer, , , .
 eel astle, .
 eibaw, son of Beli, , , .
 elasgoi, .
 eleur, ing, .
 ellam, ing, , .
 ellean, ing, .
 elleas, Sir, , ;
   elleas and ttarre, Tennysons Idyll of, .
 elles, ing, , , .
 ellinore, ing, .
 embroke, ounty uardian, the, .
 embrokeshire, , , .
 en Annwn, the ead of ades, a title of wyll, , .
 enardun, daughter of Beli and wife of lyr, , , , , .
 endaran Dyfed, , .
 endragon, meaning of the word, .
 ennant, .
 ercivale, Sir, , , , .
 eredur, , , .
 erilous glens, the, .
 ersephon, the British, , .
 ersia, ;
   isear, king of, , , -.
 etrie, Dr., , , .
 icts, , , , .
 igs, in the eltic Other World, ;
   of Manannn, , ;
   of asal, king of the olden illars, , , ;
   of ryderi, , , ;
   of March, , ;
   of Angus, ;
   ian changed into a pig, .
 igskin of ing Tuis, the, , , .
 illars, king of the olden. See asal.
 isear, king of ersia, , , -.
 iies, .
 lain of Ill uck, ;
   of the Sea, ;
   of Adoration, ;
   the Old, .
 liny, , , .
 lutarch, .
 luto, the aelic, ;
   the ambrian, .
 oetry, the aelic goddess of, ;
   cauldron of inspiration and, -.
 olicy of the hristian hurch towards obects of pagan worship, .
 ookas, , , , , .
 orsena, a oman consul, .
 oseidon, , ;
   the aelic, ;
   the British, .
 osidonius, .
 rophecy of Badb, -;
   of riu, -;
   of the seeress to ueen Medb, ;
   of ugh to onn the undred-Fighter, -;
   of athbad concerning uchulainn, ;
   concerning Deirdre, -.
 ryderi, son of wyll and hiannon, , -, , , ,
    -, -, , -, , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , ;
   is stolen at birth, ;
   meaning of his name, ;
   accompanies Brn to Ireland, -;
   is spirited away by lwyd and recovered by Manawyddan, -;
   receives a present of pigs from Annwn, ;
   is killed by wydion, ;
   appears in Arthurian legend, .
 rydwen, Arthurs ship, , , .
 uck, .
 uffin Island, .
 ursuit of Diarmait and rainne, The, -.
 wccas, .
 wyll, rince of Dyfed and ead of Annwn, , , -, , ,
    , , , , , , -, , , ;
   changes shapes with Arawn, king of Annwn, ;
   his wooing of hiannon, -;
   is owner of a magic cauldron in ades, ;
   and keeper of the oly rail in the Morte Darthur, -.
 wynt Maen Dulan, .

 ueen uinevere, , , , , , , .
 ueen Mab, .
 ueen of the Irish fairies, , ;
   of the fairies of Munster, ;
   of the fairies of North Munster, ;
   of the fairies of South Munster, .
 ueene, The Fairie, Spensers, .
 uicken-tree, the magic, .

 aces of Britain, the, -.
 athconrath, .
 ealm of lamour, The, a name for Dyfed, .
 e-birth of uchulainn, ;
   of Finn mac oul, .
 ed Book of ergest, see ergest.
 ed Branch hampions of lster, the, , , , , , , ,
    , , .
 ed Branch ouse, the, , , .
 ed Dragon of Britain, the, .
 edynvre, the stag of, .
 egan, daughter of ing eir, , .
 eligion, Aryan, , .
 etaliator, the, the sword of Manannn mac ir, , .
 evelry, the astle of, , .
 evolving astle, the, , .
 evue eltique, , , , , , , , , , , ,
    .
 hiannon, a British goddess, , -, , , , , , ,
    , , ;
   her three magic birds, , , ;
   her name afterwards corrupted into Nimue and ivien, , .
 hinnon hin Barnawd, the magic bottles of, .
 honabwy, , , ;
   The Dream of honabwy, , , .
 hyd y roes, a ford on the Severn, .
 hys, rofessor, , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , .
   See also Arthurian egend and ibbert ectures.
 i, oi, an Iberian god, .
 ibble, the river, , .
 iches, the astle of, .
 ience, ing, .
 igor, aer, .
 igosamos, a war-god worshipped in Britain, .
 itual, remains of eltic, -.
 ivers, the twelve chief, of Ireland, .
 ivers, the worship of, , .
 odrubn, the sdh of ugh, .
 omans, the, , , , , , , , .
 ome, , , , , .
 onan, lann, .
 ound Table, ing Arthurs, , .
 ound Towers, the, attributed to oibniu, .
 owan-tree, , .
 uadan, son of Bress and Brigit, -.
 ude Stone Monuments, Fergussons, , , , .
 yons, ing, .

 Sacred animals, , , ;
   islands, ;
   fish, ;
   frogs, ;
   stones, , , ;
   trees, , ;
   wells, -.
 Sacrifices of animals, , ;
   human, , -, ;
   symbolical human sacrifices, , , .
 Sadb, daughter of Bodb the ed, and mother of Ossian, .
 Sages seat, the, , .
 St. atherines ill, ;
   St. eorges ill, .
 St. all MS., the, .
 Saints, transformation of eltic gods into, , , , , , .
 Salisbury lain, .
 Salmon of nowledge, the, , ;
   of lyn lyw, .
 Samhain, the eltic winter festival, , , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 Samhanach, .
 Sarn len, .
 Sarrlog, ;
   aer Sarrlog, .
 Satires, magical, , , , .
 Scathach the Amazon, , , , , .
 Scn, the river, .
 Scot, ber, a mythical ancestor of the aels, .
 Scota, .
 Scotti, .
 Sea, eltic ideas regarding the, , , .
 Second Battle of Moytura, The, the arleian MS. called, , , ,
    , .
 Seint real, the, , , .
 Senchan Torpeist, .
 Sen Mag, see Old lain.
 Serapis worshipped at ork, .
 Setanta, original name of uchulainn, , .
 Severn, the river, , , , , .
 Sgeolan, one of Finns hounds, .
 Shadowy Town, or ity, , .
 Shakespeare, , , , , , .
 Shannon, the river, , , .
 Shape-shifting, .
 Sharvan the Surly, .
 Shield, onchobars magic, .
 Shony, a ebridean sea-god, .
 Shouts on a hill, the three, , , , .
 Sicily, , .
 Sdh Airceltrai, ;
   Bodb, ;
   as Aedha uaidh, ;
   Fionnachaidh, , , , , ;
   Meadha, , ;
   odrubn, .
 Sdhe, fairy mounds, , , , .
 Sdhe, The, the aelic gods, or fairies, , , , .
 Sidi, aer, , , , .
 Silures, tribe of the, .
 Silurian race, the, .
 Silver and, Nuadas, , , , ;
   ludds, .
 Sinann, goddess of the Shannon, .
 Skene, Dr. W. F., , , , , , , , , , , .
 Skye, Isle of, .
 Slecht, Mag. See Mag Slecht.
 Slieve Bloom, ;
   Slieve Fuad, ;
   Slieve Mish, .
 Smallpo, goddess of the, .
 Snowdon, , , , .
 Sol Apollo Anicetus, a sun-god worshipped at Bath, .
 Solar festivals of the elts, , -.
 Solinus, aius ulius, .
 Somerset, .
 Son of the oung, see Mac Oc.
 Sore, the river, .
 Sorrowful Stories of rin, The Three, .
 Spain, , ;
   used as an euphemism for the eltic Other World, , , , ,
      .
 Spear of ugh, , ;
   of isear, king of ersia, , , , .
 Spearman with the ong Shaft, .
 Speech, Aryan, , .
 Spenser, , .
 Spey, the river, .
 Splendid Mane, the horse of Manannn mac ir, , , .
 Spoiling of Annwn, The, a poem of Taliesin, , -, .
 Spring of ealth, the, .
 Sreng, a warrior of the Fir Bolgs, .
 Stag of edynvre, the, .
 Stokes, Dr. Whitley, , , , , , , , , .
 Stone, Black, of Arddhu, ;
   oronation, ;
   of Destiny, ;
   of ineely, .
 Stones, worship of, , .
 Stonehenge, , , .
 Strabo, , .
 Strachey, Sir dward, .
 Study of eltic iterature, Matthew Arnolds, , , .
 Sualtam, the mortal father of uchulainn, , , , .
 Suir, the river, .
 Sul, a goddess worshipped at Bath, , .
 Summer, the and of, i.e. the eltic Other World, , .
 Sun, worship of the, , ;
   uchulainn a personification of the, -.
 Swans, aer and Angus take the forms of, -;
   the children of r changed into, ;
   Mider and tain become, .
 Sword, of Manannn, , ;
   of Nuada, ;
   of wrnach the iant, , .
 Swinburne, .
 Swineherds, the rival, -.

 Table ound, the, , , .
 Taboos, eltic. See Destiny, easa.
 Tacitus, , , , .
 Tailtiu, the aelic gods defeated by the Milesians at, .
 Tin B huailgn, , , , , , .
 Taliesin, , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , .
 Taliesin, the Book of, , , , , , , , , , .
 Tallacht, burial-place of artholons people, .
 Tara, , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    .
 Taran, .
 Taranis, .
 Tathlum, a sling-stone, , .
 Taw, a river in South Wales, sacred to wyn ap Nudd, , , ,
    .
 Teglas well, Saint, .
 Teirnyon Twryf liant, , , , .
 Teirtu, the harp of, .
 Telltown, see Tailtiu.
 Temple of Nodens at ydney, -;
   St. auls cathedral occupying the site of a, ;
   sacrifices of cattle on the site of a, ;
   ancient British temples still standing in the sith century, .
 Tennyson, , , , , , , , , , , .
 Terrace cultivation, .
 Terrestrial gods and goddesses, .
 Terrible Broom, The, name of the banner of Oscars battalion, .
 Tethra, a king of the Fomors, , .
 Teutates, a god of the auls, , .
 Thames, the river, .
 Theseus, .
 Thirteen Treasures of Britain, the, , , , .
 Three Birds of hiannon, the, , , .
 Three hief oly Families of Britain, .
 Three ounselling nights of Arthur, .
 Three ows of Mider, , .
 Three ranes of Denial and hurlishness, .
 Three riminal esolutions of Britain, .
 Three tains, .
 Three Frivolous Battles of Britain, .
 Three enerous eroes of Britain, .
 Three wynhwyvars, .
 Three aramount risoners of Britain, -.
 Three lagues of Britain, , -.
 Three shouts on a hill, , , , .
 Three Sorrowful Stories of rin, .
 Three War-knights of Arthur, .
 Three Wicked ncoverings of Britain, .
 Tiberius, the mperor, .
 Tigernmas, a mythical Irish king, -.
 Tighernach, an old Irish chronicler, .
 Tir nam beo, see and of the iving.
 Tir nan og, see and of the oung.
 Tir Tairngir, see and of romise.
 Titania, .
 Tomb of the Dagda, .
 Tombs of the Tuatha D Danann, -.
 Torpeist, Senchan. See Senchan.
 Tory Island, , , .
 Toutates, a war-god worshipped in Britain, .
 Tower ill, Brns head buried at, , , .
 Transactions of the Ossianic Society, , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 Transmigration of souls, ;
   of the swineherds, -.
 Treasures of Britain, the Thirteen, , , , .
 Trees, the Battle of the, , -.
 Trees, worship of, .
 Triads, , , , , , , .
 Trim, .
 Trinity Well, the source of the Boyne, .
 Trinovantum, i.e. New Troy, a mythic name of ondon, , .
 Tristrem, Sir, , , .
 Trouveres, the, .
 Troy, .
 Tuatha D Danann, the gods of the ancient aels, , , , , , ,
    , , , -, -, , , , , -, , , ,
    , , , , , -, , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , -, , , , ,
    , , , , , , , ;
   their arrival in Ireland, , ;
   their battle with the Fomors, -;
   are conquered by the Milesians, ;
   retire into underground palaces, , ;
   and become the fairies of Irish belief, .
 Tuirenn, son of Ogma, , , .
 Tuirenn, the Fate of the Sons of, -.
 Tuis, king of reece, , , .
 Turning astle, .
 Tweed, the river, , .
 Twr Branwen, .
 Twrch Trwyth, the hunting of, -.
 Tylwyth Teg, the Welsh fairies, .
 Tynwald ill, .
 Tyrian ercules worshipped at orbridge, .

 aman, sdh of, .
 aran arad, spring of, .
 ffern, the old lace, a name for Annwn, .
 isnech, the hill of, , .
 lster, , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , .
 ndry, the name of the Dagdas cauldron, , .
 nius, the river, .
 nsenn, the river, .
 rddawl Ben, see enerable ead.
 rien, an nder World king, , , , ;
   riens, rience, ing, in the Morte Darthur, ;
   rianus, ing, in eoffrey of Monmouths istory, .
 snach, the sons of, -.
 ther Ben, the Wonderful ead, a name for Brn, , , .
 ther endragon, Arthurs father, , .

 al des Fes, in the forest of Brcilien, .
 andwy, aer, , .
 arro, .
 edwyd, aer, .
 enerable ead, The, .
 erses of the raves of the Warriors, The, , , .
 ictor, son of Scorcher. See wyrthur, son of reidawl.
 ita olumb, Adamnans, , .
 ivien, , .

 Wales, the Four Ancient Books of, , .
   See Skene.
 Walgan, .
 Wall, oman, , , , .
 War-chariots, ;
   uchulainns, .
 Warrefield, .
 Water-dress, Brians, .
 Waves, the Four, of Britain, .
 Wave-sweeper, Manannns boat, , , .
 Weapons of the elts, .
 Wells, worship of, , ;
   holy, .
 Welsh fairies, , -.
 Westminster, ;
   Westminster Abbey, .
 White Dragon of the Saons, .
 White-horned Bull of onnaught, , .
 White Mount in ondon, see Tower ill.
 White-tusk, king of the Boars, , .
 Wild untsman, the, .
 Wilde, Sir William, his ough orrib, ;
   ady Wildes Ancient egends of Ireland, , .
 Williams, Mr. dward. See Iolo Morganwg.
 Wish ounds, the, .
 Woden, .
 Wolf, the Morrg takes the shape of a, .
 Women, position of, among the elts, .
 Wonderful ead, the, , .
 Wood of the Two Tents, the, .
 Wordsworth, , .
 Wren, leu and the, ;
   a bird of augury among the druids, .
 Wydyr, aer, .
 Wye, the river, .

 eats, Mr., The Wanderings of Oisin, .
 ell, or eth, ounds, the, .
 ellow Book of ecan, the, , .
 ellow Shaft, one of Manannns spears, , .
 nys Avallon, .
   See Avilion, lastonbury.
 nys Branwen, .
 nys Wair, .
   See undy Island.
 ork, .
 oung, and of the, , ;
   Son of the, see Mac Oc.
 spaddaden enkawr, see awthorn, hief of iants.

 eus, , , ;
   the aelic, , , ;
   the British, , .
 immer, rofessor, .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcribers note:

ariations in accented characters have been retained.

Format of the inde has been regularised.

age , Bellico changed to Bello, aesar: De Bello allico

age , ltude changed to ltude, Introduction  ltude de la

age , full stop inserted after antheon, The aulish antheon.

age , full stop inserted after III, William . Wilde, chap.
III.

age , double quote inserted after uchtain, his name is
uchtain.

age , double quote inserted after it, not be weary of it.

age , daugher changed to daughter, the son of our daughter
thniu

age , comma changed to full stop after Dundalk, Boyne and Dundalk.
The heroic

age , double quote struck before Then, Then Nuada declared that

age , I changed to I, See chap. I

age , double quote inserted before for, she said, for I know

age , double quote inserted after ing, race as onchobar the
ing.

age , , changed to ,, We ourselves, replied

age , happend changed to happened, who happened to be assailed

age , full stop inserted after weeltia, ronounced ylta or
weeltia.

age , Mannann changed to Manannn, Ilbhreach son of Manannn,
and

age , full stop inserted after Society, Transactions of the
Ossianic Society.

age , capure changed to capture, managed to capture Mac
ineely

age , four-score changed to fourscore, man of fourscore years
would

age , amh-fada changed to amhfada, of the aelic ugh
amhfada

age , full stop inserted after ol, of Wales, ol. I

age , full stop inserted after Britain, A bardic name for
Britain.

age , double quote inserted after ryderi, I see hiannon and
ryderi.

age , full stop inserted after it, and could not get it.

age , full stop inserted after p, hys: ibid., p. .

age , full stop inserted after Brn, and the Beheading of Brn.

age , full stop inserted after hap, hap. IThe Mythological

age , full stop changed to comma after Britonum, istoria
Britonum, Books I

age , full stop inserted after MSS, Iolo MSS., p. .

age , full stop inserted after MSS, Iolo MSS., p. .

age , full stop inserted after St, were offered at St. Teglas
Well

age , homrique changed to omrique, et celle de lpope
omrique

age , a changed to , Introduction  ltude de la

age , Danaan changed to Danann, The story of the Tuatha D
Danann

age , Danaan changed to Danann, on the Tuatha D Danann

age , Dair changed to Daire, Daire of ualgne, owner of the
Brown Bull

age , Aeif changed to Aeife, Demon of the air, Aeife changed
into a

age ,  changed to , wynhwyvar, , , -, ,
.

age , ochlannoch changed to ochlannach, ochlannach, the,
, .

age , orsenna changed to orsena, orsena, a oman consul,
.





nd of the roect utenberg Book of The Mythology of the British Islands, by 
harles Squire

 ND OF TIS OT TNB BOO MTOO 

 This file should be named -.tt or -.zip 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http:www.gutenberg.org

roduced by MWS and the Online Distributed roofreading
Team at http:www.pgdp.net This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
ArchiveAmerican ibraries.


pdated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

reating the works from print editions not protected by .S. copyright
law means that no one owns a nited States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation and you! can copy and distribute it in the nited
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the eneral Terms of se part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing roect
utenberg-tm electronic works to protect the OT TNB-tm
concept and trademark. roect utenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. ou may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANTIN in the nited States with eBooks
not protected by .S. copyright law. edistribution is subect to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

STAT: F INS

T F OT TNB INS
AS AD TIS BFO O DISTIBT O S TIS WO

To protect the roect utenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
or any other work associated in any way with the phrase roect
utenberg, you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
roect utenberg-tm icense available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.orglicense.

Section . eneral Terms of se and edistributing roect
utenberg-tm electronic works

.A. By reading or using any part of this roect utenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
trademarkcopyright agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of roect utenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
roect utenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
...

.B. roect utenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most roect utenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph . below. There are a lot of things you can do with roect
utenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to roect utenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph . below.

.. The roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation the
Foundation or AF, owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of roect utenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the nited
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
nited States and you are located in the nited States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to roect utenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the roect utenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing roect utenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
roect utenberg-tm name associated with the work. ou can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full roect utenberg-tm icense when
you share it without charge with others.

.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. opyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the nited States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other roect utenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the nited States.

.. nless you have removed all references to roect utenberg:

... The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full roect utenberg-tm icense must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a roect utenberg-tm work any work
on which the phrase roect utenberg appears, or with which the
phrase roect utenberg is associated is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. ou may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the roect utenberg icense included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  nited States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

... If an individual roect utenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from tets not protected by .S. copyright law does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder, the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the nited States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase roect
utenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs .. through .. or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the roect utenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs .. or ...

... If an individual roect utenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .. through .. and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the roect utenberg-tm icense for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

... Do not unlink or detach or remove the full roect utenberg-tm
icense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with roect utenberg-tm.

... Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the roect
utenberg-tm icense.

... ou may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertet form. owever, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a roect utenberg-tm work in a format
other than lain anilla ASII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official roect utenberg-tm web site
www.gutenberg.org, you must, at no additional cost, fee or epense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of eporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original lain
anilla ASII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full roect utenberg-tm icense as specified in paragraph ...

... Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any roect utenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .. or ...

... ou may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing roect utenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

 ou pay a royalty fee of  of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of roect utenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the roect utenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the roect
  utenberg iterary Archive Foundation. oyalty payments must be paid
  within  days following each date on which you prepare or are
  legally required to prepare your periodic ta returns. oyalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the roect
  utenberg iterary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section , Information about donations to the roect utenberg
  iterary Archive Foundation.

 ou provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing or by e-mail within  days of receipt that she
  does not agree to the terms of the full roect utenberg-tm
  icense. ou must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of roect utenberg-tm
  works.

 ou provide, in accordance with paragraph .F., a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days of
  receipt of the work.

 ou comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of roect utenberg-tm works.

... If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a roect
utenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation and The
roect utenberg Trademark , the owner of the roect utenberg-tm
trademark. ontact the Foundation as set forth in Section  below.

.F.

.F.. roect utenberg volunteers and employees epend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by .S. copyright law in creating the roect
utenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, roect utenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

.F.. IMITD WAANT, DISAIM OF DAMAS - cept for the ight
of eplacement or efund described in paragraph .F., the roect
utenberg iterary Archive Foundation, the owner of the roect
utenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a roect
utenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and epenses, including legal
fees. O A TAT O A NO MDIS FO NIN, STIT
IABIIT, BA OF WAANT O BA OF ONTAT T TOS
OIDD IN AAA .F.. O A TAT T FONDATION, T
TADMA OWN, AND AN DISTIBTO ND TIS AMNT WI NOT B
IAB TO O FO ATA, DIT, INDIT, ONSNTIA, NITI O
INIDNTA DAMAS N IF O I NOTI OF T OSSIBIIT OF S
DAMA.

.F.. IMITD IT OF AMNT O FND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money if any you paid for it by sending a
written eplanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written eplanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fi the problem.

.F.. cept for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .F., this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WIT NO
OT WAANTIS OF AN IND, SS O IMID, INDIN BT NOT
IMITD TO WAANTIS OF MANTABIIT O FITNSS FO AN OS.

.F.. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the eclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maimum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

.F.. INDMNIT - ou agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of roect utenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of roect utenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and epenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: a distribution of this
or any roect utenberg-tm work, b alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any roect utenberg-tm work, and c any
Defect you cause.

Section . Information about the Mission of roect utenberg-tm

roect utenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
eists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

olunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching roect utenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the roect utenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In , the roect
utenberg iterary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for roect utenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the roect utenberg iterary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections  and  and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section . Information about the roect utenberg
iterary Archive Foundation

The roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation is a non profit
c educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted ta eempt status by the Internal
evenue Service. The Foundation's IN or federal ta identification
number is -. ontributions to the roect utenberg iterary
Archive Foundation are ta deductible to the full etent permitted by
.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: O Bo , Fairbanks, A , but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at  North  West, Salt
ake ity, T ,  -. mail contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.orgcontact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. regory B. Newby
    hief ecutive and Director
    gbnewbypglaf.org

Section . Information about Donations to the roect utenberg
iterary Archive Foundation

roect utenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
 to , are particularly important to maintaining ta eempt
status with the IS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all  states of the nited
States. ompliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning ta treatment of donations received from
outside the nited States. .S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

lease check the roect utenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.orgdonate

Section . eneral Information About roect utenberg-tm electronic works.

rofessor Michael S. art was the originator of the roect
utenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed roect utenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

roect utenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the .S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main  search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about roect utenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the roect utenberg iterary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

