The roect utenberg Book of mpire, by lifford Donald Simak

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  ou may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the roect utenberg icense included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: mpire

Author: lifford Donald Simak

elease Date: February ,  Book 

anguage: nglish


 STAT OF TIS OT TNB BOO MI 




roduced by reg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed roofreading Team at http:www.pgdp.net









                 MI

 A owerful Novel of Intrigue and Action
      in the Not-So-Distant Future

                  by

            IFFOD D. SIMA


  A omplete OIINA Book, NABIDD


          WOD DITIONS, IN.
           WST T STT
          NW O , NW O




   opyright 
         by
  WOD DITIONS, IN.


 INTD IN T .S.A.




Transcriber's Note:

    tensive research did not uncover any evidence that the .S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.




AT ON


Spencer hambers frowned at the spacegram on the desk before him. ohn
Moore Mallory. That was the man who had caused so much trouble in the
ovian elections. The troublemaker who had shouted for an investigation
of Interplanetary ower. The man who had said that Spencer hambers and
Interplanetary ower were waging economic war against the people of the
Solar System.

hambers smiled. With long, well-kept fingers, he rubbed his iron-gray
mustache.

ohn Moore Mallory was right; for that reason, he was a dangerous man.
rison was the place for him, but probably a prison outside the ovian
confederacy. erhaps one of the prison ships that plied to the edge of
the System, clear to the orbit of luto. Or would the prison on Mercury
be better?

Spencer hambers leaned back in his chair and matched his fingertips,
staring at them, frowning again.

Mercury was a hard place. A man's life wasn't worth much there. Working
in the power plants, where the Sun poured out its flaming blast of heat,
and radiations sucked the energy from one's body, in si months, a year
at most, any man was finished.

hambers shook his head. Not Mercury. e had nothing against Mallory. e
had never met the man but he rather liked him. Mallory was ust a man
fighting for a principle, the same as hambers was doing.

e was sorry that it had been necessary to put Mallory in prison. If the
man only had listened to reason, had accepted the proposals that had
been made, or ust had dropped out of sight until the ovian elections
were over ... or at least had moderated his charges. But when he had
attempted to reveal the offers, which he termed bribery, something had
to be done.

udwig Stutsman had handled that part of it. Brilliant fellow, this
Stutsman, but as mean a human as ever walked on two legs. A man utterly
without mercy, entirely without principle. A man who would stoop to any
depth. But a useful man, a good one to have around to do the dirty work.
And dirty work sometimes was necessary.

hambers picked up the spacegram again and studied it. Stutsman, out on
allisto now, had sent it. e was doing a good ob out there. The ovian
confederacy, less than one arth year under Interplanetary domination,
was still half rebellious, still angry at being forced to turn over its
government to the hand-picked officials of hambers' company. An iron
heel was needed and Stutsman was that iron heel.

                                   

So the people on the ovian satellites wanted the release of ohn Moore
Mallory. They're getting ugly, the spacegram said. It had been a
mistake to confine Mallory to allisto. Stutsman should have thought of
that.

hambers would instruct Stutsman to remove Mallory from the allisto
prison, place him on one of the prison ships. ive instructions to the
captain to make things comfortable for him. When this furor had blown
over, after things had quieted down in the ovian confederacy, it might
be possible to release Mallory. After all, the man wasn't really guilty
of any crime. It was a shame that he should be imprisoned when
racketeering rats like Scorio went scot-free right here in New ork.

A buzzer purred softly and hambers reached out to press a stud.

Dr. raven to see you, his secretary said. ou asked to see him, Mr.
hambers.

All right, said hambers. Send him right in.

e clicked the stud again, picked up his pen, wrote out a spacegram to
Stutsman, and signed it.

Dr. erbert raven stood ust inside the door, his black suit wrinkled
and untidy, his sparse sandy hair standing on end.

ou sent for me, he said sourly.

Sit down, Doctor, invited hambers.

                                   

raven sat down. e peered at hambers through thick-lensed glasses.

I haven't much time, he declared acidly.

igar? hambers offered.

Never smoke.

A drink, then?

ou know I don't drink, snapped raven.

Doctor, said hambers, you're the least sociable man I've ever known.
What do you do to enoy yourself?

I work, said raven. I find it interesting.

ou must. ou even begrudge the time it takes to talk with me.

I won't deny it. What do you want this time?

hambers swung about to face him squarely across the desk. There was a
cold look in the financier's gray eyes and his lips were grim.

raven, he said, I don't trust you. I've never trusted you. robably
that's no news to you.

ou don't trust anyone, countered raven. ou're watching everybody
all the time.

ou sold me a gadget I didn't need five years ago, said hambers. ou
outfoed me and I don't hold it against you. In fact, it almost made me
admire you. Because of that I put you under a contract, one that you and
all the lawyers in hell can't break, because someday you'll find
something valuable, and when you do, I want it. A million a year is a
high price to pay to protect myself against you, but I think it's worth
it. If I didn't think so, I'd have turned you over to Stutsman long ago.
Stutsman knows how to handle men like you.

ou mean, said raven, that you've found I'm working on something I
haven't reported to you.

That's eactly it.

ou'll get a report when I have something to report. Not before.

That's all right, said hambers. I ust wanted you to know.

raven got to his feet slowly. These talks with you are so refreshing,
he remarked.

We'll have to have them oftener, said hambers.

raven banged the door as he went out.

hambers stared after him. A queer man, the most astute scientific mind
anywhere, but not a man to be trusted.

                                   

The president of Interplanetary ower rose from his chair and walked to
the window. Below spread the roaring inferno of New ork, greatest city
in the Solar System, a strange place of queer beauty and weighty
materialism, dreamlike in its super-skyscraper construction, but
utilitarian in its purpose, for it was a port of many planets.

The afternoon sunlight slanted through the window, softening the
iron-gray hair of the man who stood there. is shoulders almost blocked
the window, for he had the body of a fighting man, one, moreover, in
good condition. is short-clipped mustache rode with an air of dignity
above his thin, rugged mouth.

is eyes looked out on the city, but did not see it. Through his brain
went the vision of a dream that was coming true. is dream spun its
fragile net about the planets of the Solar System, about their moons,
about every single foot of planetary ground where men had gone to build
and create a second homeland--the mines of Mercury and the farms of
enus, the pleasure-lands of Mars and the mighty domed cities on the
moons of upiter, the moons of Saturn and the great, cold laboratories
of luto.

ower was the key, supplied by the accumulators owned and rented by
Interplanetary ower. A monopoly of power. ower that enus and Mercury
had too much of, must sell on the market, and that the other planets and
satellites needed. ower to drive huge spaceships across the void, to
turn the wheels of industry, to heat the domes on colder worlds. ower
to make possible the life and functioning of mankind on hostile worlds.

In the great power plants of Mercury and enus, the accumulators were
charged and then shipped out to those other worlds where power was
needed. Accumulators were rented, never sold. Because they belonged at
all times to Interplanetary ower, they literally held the fate of all
the planets in their cells.

A few accumulators were manufactured and sold by other smaller
companies, but they were few and the price was high. Interplanetary saw
to that. When the cry of monopoly was raised, Interplanetary could point
to these other manufacturers as proof that there was no restraint of
trade. nder the statute no monopoly could be charged, but the cost of
manufacturing accumulators alone was protection against serious
competition from anyone.

pon a satisfactory, efficient power-storage device rested the success
or failure of space travel itself. That device and the power it stored
were for sale by Interplanetary ... and, to all practical purposes, by
Interplanetary only.

Accordingly, year after year, Interplanetary had tightened its grip upon
the Solar System. Mercury was virtually owned by the company. Mars and
enus were little more than puppet states. And now the government of the
ovian confederacy was in the hands of men who acknowledged Spencer
hambers as their master. On arth the agents and the lobbyists
representing Interplanetary swarmed in every capital, even in the
capital of the entral uropean Federation, whose people were dominated
by an absolute dictatorship. For even entral urope needed
accumulators.

conomic dictatorship, said Spencer hambers to himself. That's what
ohn Moore Mallory called it. Well, why not? Such a dictatorship would
insure the best business brains at the heads of the governments, would
give the Solar System a business administration, would guard against the
mistakes of popular government.

Democracies were based on a false presumption--the theory that all
people were fit to rule. It granted intelligence where there was no
intelligence. It presumed ability where there was not the slightest
trace of any. It gave the idiot the same political standing as the wise
man, the crackpot the same political opportunity as the man of
well-grounded common sense, the weakling the same voice as the strong
man. It was government by emotion rather than by udgment.

                                   

Spencer hambers' face took on stern lines. There was no softness left
now. The late afternoon sunlight painted angles and threw shadows and
created highlights that made him look almost like a granite mask on a
solid granite body.

There was no room for Mallory's nonsense in a dynamic, epanding
civilization. No reason to kill him--even he might have value under
certain circumstances, and no really efficient eecutive destroys
value--but he had to be out of the way where his mob-rousing tongue
could do no damage. The damned fool! What good would his idiotic
idealism do him on a prison spaceship?




AT TWO


ussell age squinted thoughtful eyes at the thing he had created--a
transparent cloud, a visible, sharply outlined cloud of something. It
was visible as a piece of glass is visible, as a globe of water is
visible. There it lay, within his apparatus, a thing that shouldn't be.

I believe we have something there, arry, he said slowly.

arry Wilson sucked at the cigarette that drooped from the corner of his
mouth, blew twin streams of smoke from his nostrils. is eyes twitched
nervously.

eah, he said. Anti-entropy.

All of that, said ussell age. erhaps a whole lot more.

It stops all energy change, said Wilson, as if time stood still and
things remained eactly as they were when time had stopped.

It's more than that, age declared. It conserves not only energy in
toto, not only the energy of the whole, but the energy of the part. It
is perfectly transparent, yet it has refractive qualities. It won't
absorb light because to do so would change its energy content. In that
field, whatever is hot stays hot, whatever is cold can't gain heat.

e scraped his hand over a week's growth of beard, considering. From his
pocket he took a pipe and a leather pouch. Thoughtfully he filled the
pipe and lit it.

It had started with his eperiments in Force Field , an eperiment to
observe the effects of heating a conductor in that field. It had been
impossible to heat the conductor electrically, for that would have upset
the field, changed it, twisted it into something else. So he had used a
Bunsen burner.

Through half-closed eyes, he still could see that slender strand of
imperm wire, how its silvery length had turned to red under the blue
flame. Deep red at first and then brighter until it flamed in almost
white-hot incandescence. And all the while the humming of the
transformer as the force field built up. The humming of the transformer
and the muted roaring of the burner and the glowing heat in the length
of wire.

Something had happened then ... an awesome something. A weird wrench as
if some greater power, some greater law had taken hold. A glove of
force, invisible, but somehow sensed, had closed about the wire and
flame. Instantly the roaring of the burner changed in tone; an odor of
gas spewed out of the vents at its base. Something had cut off the flow
of flame in the brass tube. Some force, something ...

The flame was a transparent cloud. The blue and red of flame and hot
wire had changed, in the whiplash of a second, to a refractive but
transparent cloud that hung there within the apparatus.

                                   

The red color had vanished from the wire as the blue had vanished from
the flame. The wire was shining. It wasn't silvery; it wasn't white.
There was no hint of color, ust a refractive blur that told him the
wire was there. olorless reflection. And that meant perfect
reflection! The most perfect reflectors reflect little more than  per
cent of the light incident and the absorption of the two per cent colors
those reflectors as copper or gold or chromium. But the imperm wire
within that force field that had been flame a moment before, was
reflecting all light.

e had cut the wire with a pair of shears and it had still hung,
unsupported, in the air, unchanging within the shimmer that constituted
something no man had ever seen before.

ou can't put energy in, said age, talking to himself, chewing the
bit of his pipe. ou can't take energy out. It's still as hot as it
was at the moment the change came. But it can't radiate any of that
heat. It can't radiate any kind of energy.

Why, even the wire was reflective, so that it couldn't absorb energy and
thus disturb the balance that eisted within that bit of space. Not only
energy itself was preserved, but the very form of energy.

But why? That was the question that hammered at him. Why? Before he
could go ahead, he had to know why.

erhaps the verging of the field toward Field ? Somewhere in between
those two fields of force, somewhere within that almost non-eistent
borderline which separated them, he might find the secret.

ising to his feet, he knocked out his pipe.

arry, he announced, we have work to do.

Smoke drooled from Wilson's nostrils.

eah, he said.

age had a sudden urge to lash out and hit the man. That eternal
drooling of smoke out of his nostrils, that everlasting cigarette
dangling limply from one corner of his mouth, the shifty eyes, the dirty
fingernails, got on his nerves.

But Wilson was a mechanical genius. is hands were clever despite the
dirty nails. They could fashion pinhead cameras and three-gram
electroscopes or balances capable of measuring the pressure of
electronic impacts. As a laboratory assistant he was unbeatable. If only
he wouldn't answer every statement or question with that nerve-racking
'yeah'!

age stopped in front of a smaller room, enclosed by heavy quartz.
Inside that room was the great bank of mercury-vapor rectifiers. From
them lashed a blue-green glare that splashed against his face and
shoulders, painting him in angry, garish color. The glass guarded him
from the terrific blast of ultra-violet light that flared from the pool
of shimmering molten metal, a terrible emanation that would have flayed
a man's skin from his body within the space of seconds.

                                   

The scientist squinted his eyes against the glare. There was something
in it that caught him with a deadly fascination. The personification of
power--the incredibly intense spot of incandescent vapor, the tiny
sphere of blue-green fire, the spinning surge of that shining pool, the
intense glare of ionization.

ower ... the breath of modern mankind, the pulse of progress.

In an adacent room were the accumulators. Not Interplanetary
accumulators, which he would have had to rent, but ones he had bought
from a small manufacturer who turned out only ten or fifteen thousand a
year ... not enough to bother Interplanetary.

regory Manning had made it possible for him to buy those accumulators.
Manning had made many things possible in this little laboratory hidden
deep within the heart of the Sierras, many miles from any other
habitation.

Manning's grandfather, ackson Manning, had first generated the
curvature field and overcome gravity, had left his grandson a fortune
that approached the five-billion mark. But that had not been all. From
his famous ancestor, Manning had inherited a keen, sharp, scientific
mind. From his mother's father, Anthony Barret, he had gained an astute
business sense. But unlike his maternal grandfather, he had not turned
his attention entirely to business. Old Man Barret had virtually ruled
Wall Street for almost a generation, had become a financial myth linked
with keen business sense, with an uncanny ability to handle men and
money. But his grandson, regory Manning, had become known to the world
in a different way. For while he had inherited scientific ability from
one side of the family, financial sense from the other, he likewise had
inherited from some other ancestor--perhaps remote and unknown--a
wanderlust that had taken him to the farthest outposts of the Solar
System.

                                   

It was regory Manning who had financed and headed the rescue epedition
which took the first luto flight off that dark icebo of a world when
the eploration ship had crashed. It was he who had piloted home the
winning ship in the upiter derby, sending his bulleting craft screaming
around the mighty planet in a time which set a Solar record. It was
regory Manning who had entered the enusian swamps and brought back,
alive, the mystery lizard that had been reported there. And he was the
one who had flown the serum to Mercury when the lives of ten thousand
men depended upon the thrumming engines that drove the shining ship
inward toward the Sun.

ussell age had known him since college days. They had worked out their
eperiments together in the school laboratories, had spent long hours
arguing and wondering ... debating scientific theories. Both had loved
the same girl, both had lost her, and together they had been bitter over
it ... drowning their bitterness in a three-day drunk that made campus
history.

After graduation regory Manning had gone on to world fame, had roamed
over the face of every planet ecept upiter and Saturn, had visited
every inhabited moon, had climbed unar mountains, penetrated enusian
swamps, crossed Martian deserts, driven by a need to see and eperience
that would not let him rest. ussell age had sunk into obscurity, had
buried himself in scientific research, coming more and more to aim his
effort at the discovery of a new source of power ... power that would be
cheap, that would destroy the threat of Interplanetary dictatorship.

age turned away from the rectifier room.

Maybe I'll have something to show reg soon, he told himself. Maybe,
after all these years....

                                   

Forty minutes after age put through the call to hicago, regory
Manning arrived. The scientist, watching for him from the tiny lawn that
surrounded the combined home and laboratory, saw his plane bullet into
sight, scream down toward the little field and make a perfect landing.

urrying toward the plane as regory stepped out of it, ussell noted
that his friend looked the same as ever, though it had been a year or
more since he had seen him. The thing that was discomfiting about reg
was his apparently enduring youthfulness.

e was clad in odhpurs and boots and an old tweed coat, with a
brilliant blue stock at his throat. e waved a hand in greeting and
hurried forward. uss heard the grating of his boots across the gravel
of the walk.

reg's face was bleak; it always was. A clean, smooth face, hard, with
something stern about the eyes.

is grip almost crushed uss's hand, but his tone was crisp. ou
sounded ecited, uss.

I have a right to be, said the scientist. I think I have found
something at last.

Atomic power? asked Manning. There was no flutter of ecitement in his
voice, ust a little hardening of the lines about his eyes, a little
tensing of the muscles in his cheeks.

uss shook his head. Not atomic energy. If it's anything, it's material
energy, the secret of the energy of matter.

They halted before two lawn chairs.

et's sit down here, invited uss. I can tell it to you out here,
show it to you afterward. It isn't often I can be outdoors.

It is a fine place, said reg. I can smell the pines.

The laboratory perched on a ledge of rugged rock, nearly , feet
above sea level. Before them the land swept down in agged ruggedness
to a valley far below, where a stream flashed in the noonday sun. Beyond
climbed pine-clad slopes and far in the distance gleamed shimmering
spires of snow-capped peaks.

From his leather acket uss hauled forth his pipe and tobacco, lighted
up.

It was this way, he said. eaning back comfortably he outlined the
first eperiment. Manning listened intently.

Now comes the funny part, uss added. I had hopes before, but I
believe this is what put me on the right track. I took a metal rod, a
welding rod, you know. I pushed it into that solidified force field, if
that is what you'd call it ... although that doesn't describe it. The
rod went in. Took a lot of pushing, but it went in. And though the field
seemed entirely transparent, you couldn't see the rod, even after I had
pushed enough of it in so it should have come out the other side. It was
as if it hadn't entered the sphere of force at all. As if I were ust
telescoping the rod and its density were increasing as I pushed, like
pushing it back into itself, but that, of course, wouldn't have been
possible.

e paused and puffed at his pipe, his eyes fied on the snowy peaks far
in the purple distance. Manning waited.

Finally the rod came out, uss went on. Mind you, it came out, even
after I would have sworn, if I had relied alone upon my eyes, that it
hadn't entered the sphere at all. But it came out ninety degrees
removed from its point of entry!

Wait a second, said Manning. This doesn't check. Did you do it more
than once?

I did it a dozen times and the results were the same each time. But you
haven't heard the half of it. When I pulled that rod out--yes, I could
pull it out--it was a good two inches shorter than when I had pushed it
in. I couldn't believe that part of it. It was even harder to believe
than that the rod should come out ninety degrees from its point of
entry. I measured the rods after that and made sure. ept an accurate
record. very single one of them lost approimately two inches by being
shoved into the sphere. very single one of them repeated the phenomenon
of curving within the sphere to come out somewhere else than where I had
inserted them.

                                   

Any eplanation of it? asked Manning, and now there was a cold chill
of ecitement in his voice.

Theories, no real eplanations. emember that you can't see the rod
after you push it into the sphere. It's ust as if it isn't there.
Well, maybe it isn't. ou can't disturb anything within that sphere or
you'd change the sum of potential-kinetic-pressure energies within it.
The sphere seems dedicated to that one thing ... it cannot change. If
the rod struck the imperm wire within the field, it would press the wire
down, would use up energy, decrease the potential energy. So the rod
simply had to miss it somehow. I believe it moved into some higher
plane of eistence and went around. And in doing that it had to turn so
many corners, so many fourth-dimensional corners, that the length was
used up. Or maybe it was increased in density. I'm not sure. erhaps no
one will ever know.

Why didn't you tell me about this sooner? demanded Manning. I should
have been out here helping you. Maybe I wouldn't be much good, but I
might have helped.

ou'll have your chance, uss told him. We're ust starting. I wanted
to be sure I had something before I troubled you. I tried other things
with that first sphere. I found that metal pushed through the sphere
will conduct an electrical current, which is pretty definite proof that
the metal isn't within the sphere at all. lass can be forced through it
without breaking. Not fleible glass, but rods of plain old brittle
glass. It turns without breaking, and it also loses some of its length.
Water can be forced through a tube inserted in the sphere, but only when
terrific pressure is applied. What that proves I can't even begin to
guess.

ou said you eperimented on the first sphere, said Manning. ave you
made others?

uss rose from his chair.

ome on in, reg, he said, and there was a grin on his face. I have
something you'll have to see to appreciate.

                                   

The apparatus was heavier and larger than the first in which uss had
created the sphere of energy. Fed by a powerful accumulator battery,
five power leads were aimed at it, centered in the space between four
great copper blocks.

uss's hand went out to the switch that controlled the power. Suddenly
the power beams flamed, changed from a dull glow into an intense, almost
intolerable brilliance. A dull grumble of power climbed up to a steady
wail.

The beams had changed color, were bluish now, the typical color of
ionized air. They were ust power beams, meeting at a common center, but
somehow they were queer, too, for though they were capable of slashing
far out into space, they were stopped dead. Their might was pouring into
a common center and going no farther. A splash of intensely glowing
light rested over them, then began to rotate slowly as a motor somewhere
hummed softly, cutting through the mad roar and rumble of power that
surged through the laboratory.

The glowing light was spinning more swiftly now. A rotating field was
being established. The power beams began to wink, falling and rising in
intensity. The sphere seemed to grow, almost filling the space between
the copper blocks. It touched one and rebounded slightly toward another.
It etended, increased slightly. A terrible screaming ripped through the
room, drowning out the titanic din as the spinning sphere came in
contact with the copper blocks, as force and metal resulted in weird
friction.

With a shocking wrench the beams went dead, the scream cut off, the roar
was gone. A terrifying silence fell upon the room as soon as the
suddenly thunking relays opened automatically.

                                   

The sphere was gone! In its place was a tenuous refraction that told
where it had been. That and a thin layer of perfectly reflective
copper ... colorless now, but Manning knew it was copper, for it
represented the continuation of the great copper blocks.

is mind felt as if it were racing in neutral, getting nowhere. Within
that sphere was the total energy that had been poured out by five
gigantic beams, turned on full, for almost a minute's time. ompressed
energy! nergy enough to blast these mountains down to the primal rock
were it released instantly. nergy trapped and held by virtue of some
peculiarity of that little borderline between Force Fields  and .

uss walked across the room to a small electric truck with rubber
caterpillar treads, driven by a bank of portable accumulators.
Skillfully the scientist maneuvered it over to the other side of the
room, picked up a steel bar four inches in diameter and five feet long.
olding it by the handler's magnetic crane, he fied it firmly in the
armlike aws on the front of the machine, then moved the machine into a
position straddling the sphere of force.

With smashing momentum the iron aws thrust downward, driving the steel
bar into the sphere. There was a groaning crash as the handler came to a
halt, shuddering, with only eight inches of the bar buried in the
sphere. The stench of hot insulation filled the room while the electric
motor throbbed, the rubber treads creaked, the machine groaned and
strained, but the bar would go no farther.

uss shut off the machine and stood back.

That gives you an idea, he said grimly.

The trick now, reg said, is to break down the field.

Without a word, uss reached for the power controls. A sudden roar of
thunderous fury and the beams leaped at the sphere ... but this time the
sphere did not materialize again. Again the wrench shuddered through the
laboratory, a wrench that seemed to distort space and time.

Then, as abruptly as it had come, it was gone. But when it ended,
something gigantic and incomprehensibly powerful seemed to rush
soundlessly by ... something that was felt and sensed. It was like a
great noiseless, breathless wind in the dead of night that rushed by
them and through them, all about them in space and died slowly away.

But the vanished steel did not reappear with the disappearance of the
sphere and the draining away of power. Almost grotesquely now, the
handler stood poised above the place where the sphere had been and in
its aws it held the bar. But the end of the bar, the eight inches that
had been within the sphere, was gone. It had been sliced off so sharply
that it left a highly reflective concave mirror on the severed surface.

Where is it? demanded Manning. In that higher dimension?

uss shook his head. ou noticed that rushing sensation? That may have
been the energy of matter rushing into some other space. It may be the
key to the energy of matter!

regory Manning stared at the bar. I'm staying with you, uss. I'm
seeing this thing through.

I knew you would, said uss.

Triumph flamed briefly in Manning's eyes. And when we finish, we'll
have something that will break Interplanetary. We'll smash their
stranglehold on the Solar System. e stopped and looked at age. ord,
uss, he whispered, do you realize what we'll have?

I think I do, reg, the scientist answered soberly. Material energy
engines. ower so cheap that you won't be able to give it away. More
power than anybody could ever need.




AT T


uss hunched over the keyboard set in the control room of the omet
and stared down at the keys. The equation was set and ready. All he had
to do was tap that key and they would know, beyond all argument, whether
or not they had dipped into the awful heart of material energy; whether,
finally, they held in their grasp the key to the release of energy that
would give the System power to spare.

is glance lifted from the keyboard, looked out the observation port.
Through the inkiness of space ran a faint blue thread, a tiny line that
stretched from the ship and away until it was lost in the darkness of
the void.

One hundred thousand miles away, that thread touched the surface of a
steel ball bearing ... a speck in the immensity of space.

e thought about that little beam of blue. It took power to do that,
power to hold a beam tight and strong and steady through the stress of
one hundred thousand miles. But it had to be that far away ... and they
had that power. From the bowels of the ship came the deep purr of it,
the angry, silky song of mighty engines throttled down.

e heard arry Wilson shuffling impatiently behind him, smelled the
acrid smoke that floated from the tip of Wilson's cigarette.

Might as well punch that key, uss, said Manning's cool voice. We
have to find out sooner or later.

uss's finger hovered over the key, steadied and held. When he punched
that key, if everything worked right, the energy in the tiny ball
bearing would be released instantaneously. The energy of a piece of
steel, weighing less than an ounce. Over that tight beam of blue would
flash the impulse of destruction....

is fingers plunged down.

Space flamed in front of them. For ust an instant the void seemed
filled with an angry, bursting fire that lapped with hungry tongues of
cold, blue light toward the distant planets. A flare so intense that it
was visible on the ovian worlds, three hundred million miles away. It
lighted the night-side of arth, blotting out the stars and Moon,
sending astronomers scurrying for their telescopes, rating foot-high
streamers in the night editions.

Slowly uss turned around and faced his friend.

We have it, reg, he said. We really have it. We've tested the
control formulas all along the line. We know what we can do.

We don't know it all yet, declared reg. We know we can make it work,
but I have a feeling we haven't more than skimmed the surface
possibilities.

                                   

uss sank into a chair and stared about the room. They knew they could
generate alternating current of any frequency they chose by use of a
special collector apparatus. They could release radiant energy in almost
any quantity they desired, in any wave-length, from the longest radio to
the incredibly hard cosmics. The electrical power they could measure
accurately and easily by simple voltmeters and ammeters. But radiant
energy was another thing. When it passed all hitherto known bonds, it
would simply fuse any instrument they might use to measure it.

But they knew the power they generated. In one split second they had
burst the energy bonds of a tiny bit of steel and that energy had glared
briefly more hotly than the Sun.

reg, he said, it isn't often you can say that any event was the
beginning of a new era. ou can with this--the era of unlimited power.
It kind of scares me.

p until a hundred years ago coal and oil and oygen had been the main
power sources, but with the dwindling of the supply of coal and oil, man
had sought another way. e had turned back to the old dream of snatching
power direct from the Sun. In the year  atterson had perfected the
photo-cell. Then the Aleanderson accumulators made it possible to pump
the life-blood of power to the far reaches of the System, and on Mercury
and enus, and to a lesser etent on arth, great accumulator power
plants had sprung up, with Interplanetary, under the driving genius of
Spencer hambers, gaining control of the market.

The photo-cell and the accumulator had spurred interplanetary trade and
settlement. ntil it had been possible to store Sun-power for the
driving of spaceships and for shipment to the outer planets, ships had
been driven by rocket fuel, and the struggling colonies on the outer
worlds had fought a bitter battle without the aid of ready power.

oal and oil there were in plenty on the outer worlds, but one other
essential was lacking ... oygen. oal on Mars, for instance, had to
burned under synthetic air pressures, like the old carburetor. The
result was inefficiency. A lot of coal burned, not enough power
delivered.

ven the photo-cells were inefficient when attempts were made to operate
them beyond the arth; that was the maimum distance for maimum Solar
efficiency.

uss dug into the pocket of his faded, scuffed leather acket and hauled
forth pipe and pouch. Thoughtfully he tamped the tobacco into the bowl.

Three months, he said. Three months of damn hard work.

eah, agreed Wilson, we sure have worked.

Wilson's face was haggard, his eyes red. e blew smoke through his
nostrils.

When we get back, how about us taking a little vacation? he asked.

uss laughed. ou can if you want to. reg and I are keeping on.

We can't waste time, Manning said. Spencer hambers may get wind of
this. e'd move all hell to stop us.

Wilson spat out his cigarette. Why don't you patent what you have? That
would protect you.

                                   

uss grinned, but it was a sour one.

No use, said reg. hambers would tie us up in a mile of legal red
tape. It would be ust like walking up and handing it to him.

ou guys go ahead and work, Wilson stated. I'm taking a vacation.
Three months is too damn long to stay out in a spaceship.

It doesn't seem long to me, said reg, his tone cold and sharp.

No, thought uss, it hadn't seemed long. erhaps the hours had been
rough, the work hard, but he hadn't noticed. Sleep and food had come in
snatches. For three months they had worked in space, not daring to carry
out their eperiments on arth ... frankly afraid of the thing they had.

e glanced at Manning.

The three months had left no mark upon him, no hint of fatigue or
strain. uss understood now how Manning had done the things he did. The
man was all steel and flame. Nothing could touch him.

We still have a lot to do, said Manning.

uss leaned back and puffed at his pipe.

es, there was a lot to do. Transmission problems, for instance. To
conduct away such terrific power as they knew they were capable of
developing would require copper or silver bars as thick as a man's
thigh, and even so at voltages capable of umping a two-foot spark gap.

Obviously, a small machine such as they now had would be impractical. No
matter how perfectly it might be insulated, the atmosphere itself would
not be an insulator, with power such as this. And if one tried to
deliver the energy as a mechanical rotation of a shaft, what shaft could
transmit it safely and under control?

Oh, hell, uss burst out, let's get back to arth.

                                   

arry Wilson watched the couple alight from the aero-tai, walk up the
broad steps and pass through the magic portals of the Martian lub. e
could imagine what the club was like, the deference of the management,
the eotic atmosphere of the dining room, the ecellence of the long,
cold drinks served at the bar. Mysterious drinks concocted of
ingredients harvested in the ungles of enus, spiced with produce from
the irrigated gardens of Mars.

e puffed on the dangling cigarette and shuffled on along the airy
highwalk. Below and above him, all around him flowed the beauty and the
glamor, the bravery and the splendor of New ork. The city's song was in
his ears, the surging noises that were its voice.

Two thousand feet above his head reared giant pinnacles of shining
metal, glinting in the noonday sun, architecture that bore the alien
stamp of other worlds.

Wilson turned around, stared at the Martian lub. A man needed money to
pass through those doors, to taste the drinks that slid across its bar,
to sit and watch its floor shows, to hear the music of its orchestras.

For a moment he stood, hesitating, as if he were trying to make up his
mind. e flipped away the cigarette, turned on his heel, walked briskly
to the automatic elevator which would take him to the lower levels.

There, on the third level, he entered a Mecho restaurant, sat down at a
table and ordered from the robot waiter, pushing ivory-tipped buttons on
the menu before him.

e ate leisurely, smoked ferociously, thinking. ooking at his watch, he
saw that it was nearly two o'clock. e walked to the cashier machine,
inserted the metallic check with the correct change and received from
the clicking, chuckling register the disk that would let him out the
door.

Thank you, come again, the cashier-robot fluted.

Don't mention it, growled Wilson.

Outside the restaurant he walked briskly. Ten blocks away he came to a
building roofing four square blocks. Over the massive doorway, set into
the beryllium steel, was a map of the Solar System, a map that served as
a cosmic clock, tracing the movement of the planets as they swung in
their long arcs around the Sun. The Solar System was straddled by
glowing, golden letters. They read: INTANTA BIDIN.

It was from here that Spencer hambers ruled his empire built on power.

Wilson went inside.




AT FO


The new apparatus was set up, a machine that almost filled the
laboratory ... a giant, compact mass of heavy, solidly built metal work,
tied together by beams of girderlike construction. It was meant to stand
up under the hammering of unimaginable power, the stress of unknown
spatial factors.

Slowly, carefully, ussell age tapped keys on the control board,
setting up an equation. Sucking thoughtfully at his pipe, he checked and
rechecked them.

arry Wilson regarded him through squinted eyes.

What the hell is going to happen now? he asked.

We'll have to wait and see, uss answered. We know what we want to
happen, what we hope will happen, but we never can be sure. We are
working with conditions that are entirely new.

Sitting beside a table littered with papers, staring at the gigantic
machine before him, regory Manning said slowly: That thing simply has
to adapt itself to spaceship drive. There's everything there that's
needed for space propulsion. nlimited power from a minimum of fuel.
Split-second efficiency. ntire independence of any set condition,
because the stuff creates its own conditions.

e slowly wagged his head.

The secret is some place along the line, he declared. I feel that we
must be getting close to it.

uss walked from the control board to the table, picked up a sheaf of
papers and leafed through them. e selected a handful and shook them in
his fist.

I thought I had it here, he said. My math must have been wrong, some
factor that I didn't include in the equation.

ou'll keep finding factors for some time yet, reg prophesied.

epulsion would have been the answer, said uss bitterly. And the
ord knows we have it. lenty of it.

Too much, observed Wilson, smoke drooling from his nostrils.

Not too much, corrected reg. Inefficient control. ou ump at
conclusions, Wilson.

The math didn't show that progressive action, said uss. It showed
repulsion, negative gravity that could be built up until it would shoot
the ship outside the Solar System within an hour's time. Faster than
light. We don't know how many times faster.

Forget it, advised reg. The way it stands, it's useless. ou get
repulsion by progressive steps. A series of squares with one constant
factor. It wouldn't be any good for space travel. Imagine trying to use
it on a spaceship. ou'd start with a terrific olt. The acceleration
would fade and ust when you were recovering from the first olt, you'd
get a second one and that second one would iron you out. A spaceship
couldn't take it, let alone a human body.

                                   

Maybe this will do it, said Wilson hopefully.

Maybe, agreed uss. Anyhow we'll try it. quation .

It might do the trick, said reg. It's a new approach to the gravity
angle. The equation eplains the shifting of gravitational lines, the
changing and contortion of their direction. Twist gravity and you have a
perfect space drive. As good as negative gravity. Better, perhaps, more
easily controlled. Would make for more delicate, precise handling.

uss laid down the sheaf of papers, lit his pipe and walked to the
apparatus.

ere goes, he said.

is hand went out to the power lever, eased it in. With a roar the
material energy engine built within the apparatus surged into action,
sending a flow of power through the massive leads. The thunder mounted
in the room. The laboratory seemed to shudder with the impact.

Wilson, watching intently, cried out, a brief, choked-off cry. A wave of
dizziness engulfed him. The walls seemed to be falling in. The room and
the machine were blurring. uss, at the controls, seemed horribly
disointed. Manning was a caricature of a man, a weird, strange figure
that moved and gestured in the mad room.

Wilson fought against the dizziness. e tried to take a step and the
floor seemed to leap up and meet his outstretched foot, throwing him off
balance. is cigarette fell out of his mouth, rolled along the floor.

uss was shouting something, but the words were distorted, loud one
instant, rising over the din of the apparatus, a mere whisper the net.
They made no sense.

There was a peculiar whistling in the air, a sound such as he had never
heard before. It seemed to come from far away, a high, thin shriek that
was torture in one's ears.

iddy, seized with deathly nausea, Wilson clawed his way across the
floor, swung open the laboratory door and stumbled outdoors. e weaved
across the lawn and clung to a sun dial, panting.

e looked back at the laboratory and gasped in disbelief. All the trees
were bent toward the building, as if held by some mighty wind. Their
branches straining, every single leaf standing at rigid attention, the
trees were bending in toward the structure. But there was no wind.

And then he noticed something else. No matter where the trees stood, no
matter in what direction from the laboratory, they all bent inward
toward the building ... and the whining, thundering, shrieking machine.

Inside the laboratory an empty bottle crashed off a table and smashed
into a thousand fragments. The tinkling of the broken glass was a
silvery, momentary sound that protested against the blasting thrum of
power that shook the walls.

Manning fought along the floor to uss's side. uss roared in his ear:
ravitational control! oncentration of gravitational lines!

The papers on the desk started to slide, slithering onto the floor,
danced a crazy dervish across the room. iquids in the laboratory
bottles were climbing the sides of glass, instead of lying at rest
parallel with the floor. A chair skated, bucking and tipping crazily,
toward the door.

                                   

uss erked the power lever back to zero. The power hum died. The
liquids slid back to their natural level, the chair tipped over and lay
still, papers fluttered gently downward.

The two men looked at one another across the few feet of floor space
between them. uss wiped beads of perspiration from his forehead with
his shirt sleeve. e sucked on his pipe, but it was dead.

reg, uss said ubilantly, we have something better than
anti-gravity! We have something you might call positive gravity ...
gravity that we can control. our grandfather nullified gravity. We've
gone him one better.

reg gestured toward the machine. ou created an attraction center.
What else?

But the center itself is not actually an attracting force. The fourth
dimension is mied up in this. We have a sort of fourth-dimensional lens
that concentrates the lines of any gravitational force. oncentration in
the fourth dimension turns the force loose in three dimensions, but we
can take care of that by using mirrors of our anti-entropy. We can
arrange it so that it turns the force loose in only one dimension.

reg was thoughtful for a moment. We can guide a ship by a series of
lenses, he declared at last. But here's the really important thing.
That field concentrates the forces of gravity already present. Those
forces eist throughout all of space. There are gravitational lines
everywhere. We can concentrate them in any direction we want to. In
reality, we fall toward the body which originally caused the force of
gravitation, not to the concentration.

                                   

uss nodded. That means we can create a field immediately ahead of the
ship. The ship would fall into it constantly, with the concentration
moving on ahead. The field would tend to break down in proportion to the
strain imposed and a big ship, especially when you are building up
speed, would tend to enlarge it, open it up. But the field could be kept
tight by supplying energy and we have plenty of that ... far more than
we'd ever need. We supply the energy, but that's only a small part of
it. The body emitting the gravitational force supplies the fulcrum that
moves us along.

It would operate beyond the planets, said reg. It would operate
equally well anywhere in space, for all of space is filled with
gravitational stress. We could use gravitational bodies many light years
away as the driver of our ships.

A half-wild light glowed momentarily in his eyes.

uss, he said, we're going to put space fields to work at last.

e walked to the chair, picked it up and sat down in it.

We'll start building a ship, he stated, ust as soon as we know the
mechanics of this gravity concentration and control. uss, we'll build
the greatest ship, the fastest ship, the most powerful ship the Solar
System has ever known!

                                   

Damn, said uss, that thing's slipped again.

e glared at the offending nut. I'll put a lock washer on it this
time.

Wilson stepped toward the control board. From his perch on the
apparatus, uss motioned him away.

Never mind discharging the field, he said. I can get around it
somehow.

Wilson squinted at him. This tooth is near killing me.

Still got a toothache? asked uss.

Never got a wink of sleep last night.

ou better run down to Frisco and have it yanked out, suggested the
scientist. an't have you laid up.

eah, that's right, agreed Wilson. Maybe I will. We got a lot to do.

uss reached out and clamped his wrench on the nut, quickly backed it
off and slipped on the washer. iciously he tightened it home. The
wrench stuck.

ritting his teeth on the bit of his pipe, uss cursed soundlessly. e
yanked savagely at the wrench. It slipped from his hand, hung for a
minute on the nut and then plunged downward, falling straight into the
heart of the new force field they had developed.

uss froze and watched, his heart in his throat, mad thoughts in his
brain. In a flash, as the wrench fell, he remembered that they knew
nothing about this field. All they knew was that any matter introduced
in it suddenly acquired an acceleration in the dimension known as time,
with its normal constant of duration reduced to zero.

When that wrench struck the field, it would cease to eist! But
something else might happen, too, something entirely unguessable.

The wrench fell only a few feet, but it seemed to take long seconds as
uss watched, frozen in fascination.

e saw it strike the hazy glow that defined the limits of the field, saw
it floating down, as if its speed had been slowed by some dense medium.

In the instant that hazy glow intensified a thousand times--became a
blinding sun-burst! uss ducked his head, shielded his eyes from the
terrible blast of light. A rending, shuddering thud seemed to echo ...
in space rather than in air ... and both field and wrench were gone!

A moment passed, then another, and there was the heavy, solid clanging
thud of something striking metal. This time the thud was not in space,
but a commonplace noise, as if someone had dropped a tool on the floor
above.

uss turned around and stared at Wilson. Wilson stared back, his mouth
hanging open, the smoldering, cigarette dangling from his mouth.

reg! uss shouted, his cry shattering the silence in the laboratory.

A door burst open and Manning stepped into the main laboratory room, a
calculation pad in one hand, a pencil in the other.

What's the matter? he demanded.

We have to find my wrench!

our wrench? reg was puzzled. an't you get another?

I dropped it into the field. Its time-dimension was reduced to zero. It
became an 'instantaneous wrench'.

Nothing new in that, said reg, unruffled.

But there is, persisted uss. The field collapsed, you see. Maybe the
wrench was too big for it to handle. And when the field collapsed the
wrench gained a new time-dimension. I heard it. We have to find it.

The three of them pounded up the stairs to the room where uss had heard
the thump. There was nothing on the floor. They searched the room from
end to end, then the other rooms. There was no wrench.

At the end of an hour reg went back to the main laboratory, brought
back a portable fluoroscope.

Maybe this will do the trick, he announced bleakly.

                                   

It did. They found the wrench inside the space between the walls!

uss stared at the shadow in the fluoroscope plate. ndeniably it was
the shadow of the wrench.

Fourth dimension, he said. Transported in time.

The muscles in reg's cheeks were tensed, that old flame of ecitement
burning in his eyes, but otherwise his face was the mask of old, the
calm, almost terrible mask that had faced a thousand dangers.

ower and time, he corrected.

If we can control it, said uss.

Don't worry. We can control it. And when we can, it's the biggest thing
we've got.

Wilson licked his lips, dredged a cigarette out of a pocket.

If you don't mind, he said, I'll hit for Frisco tonight. This tooth
of mine is getting worse.

Sure, can't keep an aching tooth, agreed uss, thinking of the wrench
while talking.

an I take your ship? asked Wilson.

Sure, said uss.

Back in the laboratory they rebuilt the field, dropped little ball
bearings in it. The ball bearings disappeared. They found them
everywhere--in the walls, in tables, in the floor. Some, still eisting
in their new time-dimension, hung in mid-air, invisible, intangible, but
there.

ours followed hours, with the sheet of data growing. Math machines
whirred and chuckled and clicked. Wilson departed for San Francisco with
his aching tooth. The other two worked on. By dawn they knew what they
were doing. Out of the chaos of happenstance they were finding rules of
order, certain formulas of behavior, equations of force.

The net day they tried heavier, more complicated things and learned
still more.

A radiogram, phoned from the nearest spaceport, forty miles distant,
informed them that Wilson would not be back for a few days. is tooth
was worse than he had thought, required an operation and treatment of
the aw.

ell, said uss, ust when he could be so much help.

With Wilson gone the two of them tackled the controlling device, labored
and swore over it. But finally it was completed.

Slumped in chairs, utterly ehausted, they looked proudly at it.

With that, said uss, we can take an obect and transport it any
place we want. Not only that, we can pick up any obect from an
indefinite distance and bring it to us.

What a thing for a lazy burglar, reg observed sourly.

Worn out, they gulped sandwiches and scalding coffee, tumbled into bed.

                                   

The outdoor camp meeting was in full swing. The evangelist was in his
top form. The sinners' bench was crowded. Then suddenly, as the
evangelist paused for a moment's silence before he drove home an
important point, the music came. Music from the air. Music from
somewhere in the sky. The soft, heavenly music of a hymn. As if an
angels' chorus were singing in the blue.

The evangelist froze, one arm pointing upward, with inde finger ready
to sweep down and emphasize his point. The sinners kneeling at the bench
were petrified. The congregation was astounded.

The hymn rolled on, punctuated, backgrounded by deep celestial organ
notes. The clear voice of the choir swept high to a bell-like note.

Behold! shrieked the evangelist. Behold, a miracle! Angels singing
for us! neel! neel and pray!

Nobody stood.

                                   

Andy McIntyre was drunk again. In the piteous glare of mid-morning, he
staggered homeward from the poker party in the back of Steve Abram's
harness shop. The light revealed him to the scorn of the entire village.

At the corner of lm and Third he ran into a maple tree. ncertainly he
backed away, intent on making another try. Suddenly the tree spoke to
him:

Alcohol is the scourge of mankind. It turns men into beasts. It robs
them of their brains, it shortens their lives ...

Andy stared, unable to believe what he heard. The tree, he had no doubt,
was talking to him personally.

The voice of the tree went on: ... takes the bread out of the mouths of
women and children. Fosters crime. Weakens the moral fiber of the
nation.

Stop! screamed Andy. Stop, I tell you!

The tree stopped talking. All he could hear was the whisper of wind
among its autumn-tinted leaves.

Suddenly running, Andy darted around the corner, headed home.

Begad, he told himself, when trees start talkin' to you it's time to
lay off the bottle!

                                   

In another town fifty miles distant from the one in which the tree had
talked to Andy McIntyre, another miracle happened that same Sunday
morning.

Dozens of people heard the bronze statue of the soldier in the courtyard
speak. The statue did not come to life. It stood as ever, a solid piece
of golden bronze, in spots turned black and green by weather. But from
its lips came words ... words that burned themselves into the souls of
those who heard. Words that ehorted them to defend the principles for
which many men had died, to grasp and hold high the torch of democracy
and liberty.

In somber bitterness, the statue called Spencer hambers the greatest
threat to that liberty and freedom. For, the statue said, Spencer
hambers and Interplanetary ower were waging an economic war, a
bloodless one, but ust as truly war as if there were cannons firing and
bombs eploding.

For a full five minutes the statue spoke and the crowd, growing by the
minute, stood dumbfounded.

Then silence fell over the courtyard. The statue stood as before,
unmoving, its timeless eyes staring out from under the ugly helmet, its
hands gripping the bayoneted rifle. A blue and white pigeon fluttered
softly down, alighted on the bayonet, looked the crowd over and then
flew to the courthouse tower.

                                   

Back in the laboratory, uss looked at reg.

That radio trick gives me an idea, he said. If we can put a radio in
statues and trees without interfering with its operation, why can't we
do the same thing with a television set?

reg started. Think of the possibilities of that! he burst out.

Within an hour a complete television sending apparatus was placed within
the field and a receptor screen set up in the laboratory.

The two moved chairs in front of the screen and sat down. uss reached
out and pulled the switch of the field control. The screen came to life,
but it was only a gray blur.

It's traveling too fast, said reg. Slow it down.

uss retarded the lever. When that thing's on full, it's almost
instantaneous. It travels in a time dimension and any speed slower than
instantaneity is a modification of that force field.

On the screen swam a panorama of the mountains, mile after mile of
snow-capped peaks and valleys ablaze with the flames of autumn foliage.
The mountains faded away. There was desert now and then a city. uss
dropped the televisor set lower, down into a street. For half an hour
they sat comfortably in their chairs and watched men and women walking,
witnessed one dog fight, cruised slowly up and down, looking into
windows of homes, window-shopping in the business section.

There's ust one thing wrong, said reg. We can see everything, but
we can't hear a sound.

We can fi that, uss told him.

e lifted the televisor set from the streets, brought it back across the
desert and mountains into the laboratory.

We have two practical applications now, said reg. Space drive and
television spying. I don't know which is the best. Do you realize that
with this television trick there isn't a thing that can be hidden from
us?

I believe we can go to Mars or Mercury or anywhere we want to with this
thing. It doesn't seem to have any particular limits. It handles
perfectly. ou can move it a fraction of an inch as easily as a hundred
miles. And it's fast. Almost instantaneous. Not quite, for even with
our acceleration within time, there is a slight lag.

By evening they had an audio apparatus incorporated in the set, had
wired the screen for sound.

et's put this to practical use, suggested reg. There's a show at
the New Mercury Theater in New ork I've been wanting to see. et's
knock off work and take in that show.

Now, said uss, you really have an idea. The ticket scalpers are
charging a fortune, and it won't cost us a cent to get in!




AT FI


ine roots burned brightly in the fireplace, snapping and sizzling as
the blaze caught and flamed on the resin. Deep in an easy chair, reg
Manning stretched his long legs out toward the fire and lifted his
glass, squinting at the flames through the amber drink.

There's something that's been worrying me a little, he said. I hadn't
told you about it because I figured it wasn't as serious as it looked.
Maybe it isn't, but it looks funny.

What's that? asked uss.

The stock market, replied reg. There's something devilish funny
going on there. I've lost about a billion dollars in the last two
weeks.

A billion dollars? gasped uss.

reg swirled the whiskey in his glass. Don't sound so horrified. The
loss is all on paper. My stocks have gone down. Most of them cut in
half. Some even less than that. Martian Irrigation is down to . I paid
 for it. It's worth .

ou mean something has happened to the market?

Not to the market. If that was it, I wouldn't worry. I've seen the
market go up and down. That's nothing to worry about. But the market,
ecept for a slight depression, has behaved normally in these past two
weeks. It almost looks as if somebody was out to get me.

Who'd want to and why?

reg sighed. I wish I knew. I haven't really lost a cent, of course. My
shares can't stay down for very long. The thing is that right now I
can't sell them even for what I paid for them. If I sold now I'd lose
that billion. But as long as I don't have to sell, the loss is merely on
paper.

e sipped at the drink and stared into the fire.

If you don't have to, what are you worrying about? asked uss.

ouple of things. I put that stock up as collateral to get the cash to
build the spaceship. At present prices, it will take more securities
than I thought. If the prices continue to go down, I'll have the bulk of
my holdings tied up in the spaceship. I might even be forced to
liquidate some of it and that would mean an actual loss.

e hunched forward in the chair, stared at uss.

Another thing, he said grimly, is that I hate the idea of somebody
singling me out as a target. As if they were going to make a financial
eample of me.

And it sounds as if someone has, agreed uss.

reg leaned back again, drained his glass and set it down.

It certainly does, he said.

Outside, seen through the window beside the fireplace, the harvest moon
was a shield of silver hung in the velvet of the sky. A lonesome wind
moaned in the pines and under the eaves.

I got a report from Belgium the other day, said reg. The spaceship
is coming along. It'll be the biggest thing afloat in space.

The biggest and the toughest, said uss, and reg nodded silent
agreement.

The ship itself was being manufactured at the great Space Works in
Belgium, but other parts of it, apparatus, engines, gadgets of every
description, were being manufactured at other widely scattered points.
Anyone wondering what kind of ship the finished product would be would
have a hard time gathering the correct information, which, of course,
was the idea. The anyone they were guarding against was Spencer
hambers.

                                   

We need a better television set, said uss. This one we have is all
right, but we need the best there is. I wonder if Wilson could get us
one in Frisco and bring it back.

I don't see why not, said reg. Send him a radio.

uss stepped to the phone, called the spaceport and filed the message.

e always stays at the reater Martian, he told reg. We'll probably
catch him there.

                                   

Two hours later the phone rang. It was the spaceport.

That message you sent to Wilson, said the voice of the operator,
can't be delivered. Wilson isn't at the reater Martian. The clerk said
he checked out for New ork last night.

Didn't he leave a forwarding address? asked uss.

Apparently not.

uss hung up the receiver, frowning. Wilson is in New ork.

reg looked up from a sheet of calculations.

New ork, eh? he said and then went back to work, but a moment later
he straightened from his work. What would Wilson be doing in New ork?

I wonder ... uss stopped and shook his head.

actly, said reg. e glanced out of the window, considering, the
muscles in his cheeks knotting. uss, we both are thinking the same
thing.

I hate to think it, said uss evenly. I hate to think such a thing
about a man.

One way to find out, declared reg. e rose from the chair and walked
to the television control board, snapped the switch. uss took a chair
beside him. On the screen the mountains danced weirdly as the set
rocketed swiftly away and then came the glint of red and yellow desert.
Blackness blanked out the screen as the set plunged into the ground,
passing through the curvature of the arth's surface. The blackness
passed and fields and farms were beneath them on the screen, a green and
brown checkerboard with tiny white lines that were roads.

New ork was in the screen now. reg's hand moved the control and the
city rushed up at them, the spires speeding toward them like plunging
spears. Down into the canyons plunged the set, down into the financial
district with its beetling buildings that hemmed in the roaring traffic.

rimly, surely, reg drove his strange machine through New ork. Through
buildings, through shimmering planes, through men. ike an arrow the
television set sped to its mark and then reg's hand snapped back the
lever and in the screen was a building that covered four whole blocks.
Above the entrance was the famous Solar System map and straddling the
map were the gleaming golden letters: INTANTA BIDIN.

Now we'll see, said reg.

e heard the whistle of the breath in uss's nostrils as the television
set began to move, saw the tight grip uss had upon the chair arms.

The interior of the building showed on the screen as he drove the set
through steel and stone, offices and corridors and brief glimpses of
steel partitions, until it came to a door marked: SN AMBS,
SIDNT.

reg's hand twisted the control slightly and the set went through the
door, into the office of Spencer hambers.

Four men were in the room--hambers himself; raven, the scientist;
Arnold rant, head of Interplanetary's publicity department, and arry
Wilson!

Wilson's voice came out of the screen, a frantic, almost terrified
voice.

I've told you all I know. I'm not a scientist. I'm a mechanic. I've
told you what they're doing. I can't tell you how they do it.

Arnold rant leaned forward in his chair. is face was twisted in fury.

There were plans, weren't there? he demanded. There were equations
and formulas. Why didn't you bring us some of them?

Spencer hambers raised a hand from the desk, waved it toward rant.
The man has told us all he knows. Obviously, he can't be any more help
to us.

ou told him to go back and see if he couldn't find something else,
didn't you? asked rant.

es, I did, hambers told him. But apparently he couldn't find it.

I tried, pleaded Wilson. erspiration stood out on his forehead. The
cigarette in his mouth was limp and dead. One of them was always there.
I never could get hold of any papers. I asked questions, but they were
too busy to answer. And I couldn't ask too much, because then they would
have suspected me.

No, you couldn't do that, commented raven with an open sneer.

                                   

In the laboratory uss pounded the arm of his chair with a clenched
fist. The rat sold us out!

reg said nothing, but his face was stony and his eyes were
crystal-hard.

On the screen hambers was speaking to Wilson. Do you think you could
find something out if you went back again?

Wilson squirmed in his chair.

I'd rather not. is voice sounded like a whimper. I'm afraid they
suspect me now. I'm afraid of what they'd do if they found out.

That's his conscience, breathed uss in the laboratory. I never
suspected him.

e's right about one thing, though, reg said. e'd better not come
back.

hambers was talking again: ou realize, of course, that you haven't
been much help to us. ou have only warned us that another kind of power
generation is being developed. ou've set us on our guard, but other
than that we're no better off than we were before.

Wilson bristled, like a cowardly animal backed into a corner. I told
you what was going on. ou can be ready for it now. I can't help it if I
couldn't find out how all them things worked.

ook here, said hambers. I made a bargain with you and I keep my
bargains. I told you I would pay you twenty thousand dollars for the
information you gave me when you first came to see me. I told you I'd
pay you for any further additional information you might give. Also I
promised you a ob with the company.

Watching the financier, Wilson licked his lips. That's right, he said.

hambers reached out and pulled a checkbook toward him, lifted a pen
from its holder. I'm paying you the twenty thousand for the warning.
I'm not paying you a dime more, because you gave me no other
information.

Wilson leaped to his feet, started to protest.

Sit down, said hambers coldly.

But the ob! ou said you'd give me a ob!

hambers shook his head. I wouldn't have a man like you in my
organization. If you were a traitor to one man, you would be to
another.

But ... but ... Wilson started to obect and then sat down, his face
twisted in something that came very close to fear.

hambers ripped the check out of the book, waved it slowly in the air to
dry it. Then he arose and held it out to Wilson, who reached out a
trembling hand and took it.

And now, said hambers, good day, Mr. Wilson.

For a moment Wilson stood uncertain, as if he intended to speak, but
finally he turned, without a word, and walked through the door.

                                   

In the laboratory uss and reg looked at one another.

Twenty thousand, said reg. Why, that was worth millions.

It was worth everything hambers had, said uss, because it's the
thing that's going to wreck him.

Their attention snapped back to the screen.

hambers was hunched over his desk, addressing the other two.

Now, gentlemen, he asked, what are we to do?

raven shrugged his shoulders. There was a puzzled frown in the eyes
back of the thick-lensed glasses. We haven't much to go on. Wilson
doesn't know a thing about it. e hasn't the brain to grasp even the
most fundamental ideas back of the whole thing.

hambers nodded. The man knew the mechanical setup perfectly, but that
was all.

I've constructed the apparatus, said raven. It's astoundingly
simple. Almost too simple to do the things Wilson said it would do. e
drew plans for it, so clear that it was easy to duplicate the apparatus.
e himself checked the machine and says it is the same as age and
Manning have. But there are thousands of possible combinations for
hookups and control board settings. Too many to try to go through and
hit upon the right answer. Because, you see, one slight adustment in
any one of a hundred adustments might do the trick ... but which of
those adustments do you have to make? We have to have the formulas, the
equations, before we can even move.

e seemed to remember a few things, said rant hopefully. ertain
rules and formulas.

raven flipped both his hands angrily. Worse than nothing, he
eploded. What age and Manning have done is so far in advance of
anything that anyone else has even thought about that we are completely
at sea. They're working with space fields, apparently, and we haven't
even scratched the surface in that branch of investigation. We simply
haven't got a thing to go on.

                                   

No chance at all? asked hambers.

raven shook his head slowly.

At least you could try, snapped rant.

Now, wait, hambers snapped back. ou seem to forget Dr. raven is
one of the best scientists in the world today. I'm relying on him.

raven smiled. I can't do anything with what age and Manning have, but
I might try something of my own.

By all means do so, urged hambers. e turned to rant. I observed
you have carried out the plans we laid. Martian Irrigation hit a new low
today.

rant grinned. It was easy. ust a hint here and there to the right
people.

hambers looked down at his hands, slowly closing into fists. We have
to stop them some way, any way at all. eep up the rumors. We'll make
it impossible for reg Manning to finance this new invention. We'll take
away every last dollar he has.

e glared at the publicity man. ou understand?

es, sir, said rant, I understand perfectly.

All right, said hambers. And your ob, raven, is to either develop
what age has found or find something we can use in competition.

raven growled angrily. What happens if your damn rumors can't ruin
Manning? What if I can't find anything?

In that case, said hambers, there are other ways.

Other ways?

hambers suddenly smiled at them. I have a notion to call Stutsman back
to arth.

raven drummed his fingers idly on the arm of his chair. es, I guess
you do have other ways, he said.

                                   

reg's hand snapped the switch and the screen suddenly was blank as the
televisor set returned instantly to the laboratory.

That eplains a lot of things, he said. Among them what has happened
to my stocks.

uss sat in his chair, numbed. That little weak-kneed, ratting traitor,
Wilson. e'd sell his mother for a new ten-dollar bill.

We know, said reg, and hambers doesn't know we know. We'll follow
every move he makes. We'll know every one of his plans.

acing up and down the room, he was already planning their campaign.

There are still a few things to do, he added. A few possibilities we
may have overlooked.

But will we have time? asked uss.

I think so. hambers is going to go slow. The gamble is too big to risk
any slip. e doesn't want to get in bad with the law. There won't be any
strong-arm stuff ... not until he recalls Stutsman from allisto.

e paused in mid-stride, stood planted solidly on the floor.

When Stutsman gets into the game, he said, all hell will break
loose.

e took a deep breath.

But we'll be ready for it then!




AT SI


If we can get television reception with this apparatus of ours, asked
reg, what is to prevent us from televising? Why can't we send as well
as receive?

uss drew doodles on a calculation sheet. We could. ust something else
to work out. ou must remember we're working in a four-dimensional
medium. That would complicate matters a little. Not like working in
three dimensions alone. It would ...

e stopped. The pencil fell from his finger and he swung around slowly
to face Manning.

What's the matter now? asked reg.

ook, said uss ecitedly. We're working in four dimensions. And if
we televised through four dimensions, what would we get?

reg wrinkled his brow. Suddenly his face relaed. ou don't mean we
can televise in three dimensions, do you?

That's what it should work out to, declared uss. e swung back to the
table again, picked up his pencil and otted down equations. e looked
up from the sheet. Three-dimensional television! he almost whispered.

Something new again, commented reg.

I'll say it's new!

uss reached out and erked a calculator toward him. apidly he set up
the equations, pressed the tabulator lever. The machine gurgled and
chuckled, clicked out the result. Bending over to read it, uss sucked
in his breath.

It's working out right, he said.

That'll mean new equipment, lots of it, reg pointed out. Wilson's
gone, damn him. Who's going to help us?

We'll do it ourselves, said uss. When we're the only ones here, we
can be sure there won't be any leak.

It took hours of work on the math machines, but at the end of that time
uss was certain of his ground.

Now we go to work, he said, gleefully.

In a week's time they had built a triple televisor, but simplifications
of the standard commercial set gave them a mechanism that weighed little
more and was far more efficient and accurate.

During the time the work went on they maintained a watch over both the
office of Spencer hambers and the laboratory in which Dr. erbert
raven worked  hours a day. nseen, unsuspected, they were silent
companions of the two men during many hours. They read what the men
wrote, read what was written to them, heard what they said, saw how they
acted. Doing so, the pair in the high mountain laboratory gained a deep
insight into the characters of unsuspecting quarries.

Both utterly ruthless, declared reg. But apparently men who are
sincere in thinking that the spoils belong to the strong. Strange,
almost outdated men. ou can't help but like hambers. e's good enough
at heart. e has his pet charities. e really, I believe, wants to help
the people. And I think he actually believes the best way to do it is to
gain a dictatorship over the Solar System. That ambition rules
everything in his life. It has hardened him and strengthened him. e
will crush ruthlessly, without a single qualm, anything that stands in
his path. That's why we'll have a fight on our hands.

                                   

raven seemed to be making little progress. They could only guess at
what he was trying to develop.

I think, said uss, he's working on a collector field to suck in
radiant energy. If he really gets that, it will be something worth
having.

For hours raven sat, an intent, untidy, unkempt man, sunk deep in the
cushions of an easy chair. is face was calm, with relaed aw and eyes
that seemed vacant. But each time he would rouse himself from the chair
to pencil new notations on the pads of paper that littered his desk. New
ideas, new approaches.

The triple televisor was completed ecept for one thing.

Sound isn't so easy, said uss. If we could only find a way to
transmit it as well as light.

isten, said reg, why don't you try a condenser speaker.

A condenser speaker?

Sure, the gadget developed way back in the s. It hasn't been used
for years to my knowledge, but it might do the trick.

uss grinned broadly. ell, why didn't I think of that? ere I've been
racking my brain for a new approach, a new wrinkle ... and eactly what
I wanted was at hand.

Should work, declared reg. ust the opposite of a condenser
microphone. Instead of radiating sound waves mechanically, it radiates a
changing electric field and this field becomes audible directly within
the ear. ven yet no one seems to understand ust how it works, but it
does ... and that's good enough.

I know, said uss. It really makes no sound. In other words it
creates an electric field that doubles for sound. It ought to be ust
the thing because nothing can stop it. Metal shielding can, I guess, if
it's thick enough, but it's got to be pretty damn thick.

It took time to set the mechanism up. eady, the massive apparatus,
within which glowed a larger and more powerful force field, was operated
by two monstrous material energy engines. The controls were equipped
with clockwork drives, designed so that the motion of the arth could be
nullified completely and automatically for work upon outlying planets.

                                   

uss stood back and looked at it. Stand in front of that screen, reg,
he said, and we'll try it on you.

reg stepped in front of the screen. The purr of power came on.
Suddenly, materializing out of the air, came reg's proection. azy and
undefined at first, it rapidly assumed apparent solidity. reg waved his
arm; the image moved its arm.

uss left the controls and walked across the laboratory to inspect the
image. amined from all sides, it looked solid. uss walked through
it and felt nothing. There was nothing there. It was ust a
three-dimensional image. But even from two feet away, it was as if the
man himself stood there in all the actuality of flesh and blood.

ello, uss, the image whispered. It held out a hand. lad to see you
again.

aughing, uss thrust out his hand. It closed on nothing in mid-air, but
the two men appeared to shake hands.

They tested the machine that afternoon. Their images strode above the
trees, apparently walking on thin air. igantic replicas of reg stood
on a faraway mountain top and shouted with a thunderous voice. Smaller
images, no more than two inches high, shinnied up a table leg.

Satisfied, they shut off the machine.

That's one of the possibilities you mentioned, suggested uss.

reg nodded grimly.

                                   

An autumn gale pelted the windows with driving rain, and a wild, wet
wind howled through the pines outside. The fire was leaping and flaring
in the fireplace.

Deep in his chair, uss stared into the flame and puffed at his pipe.

The factory wants more money on the spaceship, said reg from the
other chair. I had to put up some more shares as collateral on a new
loan.

Market still going down? asked uss.

Not the market, replied reg. My stocks. All of them hit new lows
today.

uss dragged at the pipe thoughtfully. I've been thinking about that
stock business, reg.

So have I, but it doesn't seem to do much good.

ook, said uss slowly, what planets have echanges?

All of them ecept Mercury. The ovian echange is at anthoor. There's
even one out at luto. ust mining and chemical shares listed, though.

uss did not reply. Smoke curled up from his pipe. e was staring into
the fire.

Why do you ask? reg wanted to know.

ust something stirring around in my mind. I was wondering where
hambers does most of his trading.

anthoor now, said reg. sed to do it on enus. The listing is
larger there. But since he took over the ovian confederacy, he switched
his business to it. The transaction ta is lower. e saw to that.

And the same shares are listed on the allisto market as on the New
ork boards?

Naturally, said reg, only not as many.

uss watched the smoke from his pipe. ow long does it take light to
travel from allisto to arth?

Why, about  minutes, I guess. Somewhere around there. reg sat
upright. Say, what's light got to do with this?

A lot, said uss. All commerce is based on the assumption that light
is instantaneous, but it isn't. All business, anywhere throughout the
Solar System, is based on reenwich time. When a noon signal sent out
from arth reaches Mars, it's noon there, but as a matter of fact, it is
actually  minutes or so past noon. When the same signal reaches
allisto, the correct time for the chronometer used in commerce would be
noon when it is really a quarter to one. That system simplifies things.
Does away with varying times. And it has worked all right so far because
there has been, up to now, nothing that could go faster than light. No
news can travel through space, no message, no signal can be sent at any
speed greater than that. So everything has been fine.

reg had come out of the chair, was standing on his feet, the glow of
the blaze throwing his athletic figure into bold relief. That calm
eterior had been stripped from him now. e was ecited.

I see what you are getting at! We have something that is almost
instantaneous!

Almost, said uss. Not quite. There's a time lag somewhere. But it
isn't noticeable ecept over vast distances.

But it would beat ordinary light signals to allisto. It would beat
them there by almost  minutes.

Almost, uss agreed. Maybe a split second less.

reg strode up and down in front of the fireplace like a caged lion. By
heaven, he said, we've got hambers where we want him. We can beat the
stock quotations to allisto. With that advance knowledge of what the
board is doing in New ork, we can make back every dime I've lost. We
can take Mr. hambers to the cleaners!

uss grinned. actly, he said. We'll know  minutes in advance of
the other traders what the market will be. et's see hambers beat
that.




AT SN


Ben Wrail was taking things easy. Stretched out in his chair, with his
cigar lit and burning satisfactorily, he listened to a radio program
broadcast from arth.

Through the window beside him, he could look out of his skyscraper
apartment over the domed city of anthoor. ooming in the sky, slightly
distorted by the heavy quartz of the distant dome, was massive upiter,
a scarlet ball tinged with orange and yellow. Overwhelmingly luminous,
monstrously large, it filled a large portion of the visible sky, a sight
that brought millions of tourists to the ovian moons each year, a sight
that even the old-timers still must stare at, drawn by some unfathomable
fascination.

Ben Wrail stared at it now, puffing at his cigar, listening to the
radio. An awe-inspiring thing, a looming planet that seemed almost ready
to topple and crash upon this airless, frigid world.

Wrail was an old-timer. For thirty years--arth years--he had made his
home in anthoor. e had seen the city grow from a dinky little mining
camp enclosed by a small dome to one that boasted half a million
population. The dome that now covered the city was the fourth one. Four
times, like the nautilus, the city had outgrown its shell, until today
it was the greatest domed city in the Solar System. Where life had once
been cheap and where the scum of the system had held rendezvous, he had
seen anthoor grow into a city of dignity, capital of the ovian
confederacy.

e had helped build that confederacy, had been elected a member of the
constitution commission, had helped create the government and for over a
decade had helped to make its laws.

But now ... Ben Wrail spat angrily and stuffed the cigar back in his
mouth again, taking a fresh and fearsome grip. Now everything had
changed. The ovian worlds today were held in bond by Spencer hambers.
The government was in the hands of his henchmen. Duly elected, of
course, but in an election held under the unspoken threat that
Interplanetary ower would withdraw, leaving the moons circling the
great planet without heat, air, energy. For the worlds of the ovian
confederacy, every single one of them, depended for their life upon the
accumulators freighted outward from the Sun.

Talk of revolt was in the air, but, lacking a leader, it would get
nowhere. ohn Moore Mallory was imprisoned on one of the prison
spaceships that plied through the Solar System. Mallory, months ago, had
been secretly transferred from the allisto prison to the spaceship, but
in a week's time the secret had been spread in angry whispers. If there
had been riots and bloodshed, they would have been to no purpose. For
revolution, even if successful, would gain nothing. It would merely goad
Interplanetary ower into withdrawing, refusing to service the domed
cities on the moons.

                                   

Ben Wrail stirred restlessly in his chair. The cigar had gone out. The
radio program blared unheard. is eyes still looked out the window
without seeing upiter.

Damn, said Ben Wrail. Why did he have to go and spoil an evening
thinking about this damned political situation? Despite his part in the
building of the confederacy, he was a businessman, not a politician.
Still, it hurt to see something torn down that he had helped to build,
though he knew that every pioneering strike in history had been taken
over by shrewd, ruthless, powerful operators. nowing that should have
helped, but it didn't. e and the other ovian pioneers had hoped it
wouldn't happen and, of course, it had.

Ben Wrail, said a voice in the room.

Wrail swung around, away from the window.

Manning! he yelled, and the man in the center of the room grinned
bleakly at him. ow did you come in without me hearing you? When did
you get here?

I'm not here, said reg. I'm back on arth.

ou're what? asked Wrail blankly. That's a pretty silly statement,
isn't it, Manning? Or did you decide to loosen up and pull a gag now and
then?

I mean it, said Manning. This is ust an image of me. My body is back
on arth.

ou mean you're dead? ou're a ghost?

The grin widened, but the face was bleak as ever.

No, Ben, I'm ust alive as you are. et me eplain. This is a
television image of me. Three-dimensional television. I can travel
anywhere like this.

Wrail sat down in the chair again. I don't suppose there'd be any use
trying to shake hands with you.

No use, agreed Manning's image. There isn't any hand.

Nor asking you to have a chair?

Manning shook his head.

Anyhow, said Wrail, I'm damn glad to see you--or think I see you. I
don't know which. Figure you can stay and talk with me a while?

                                   

ertainly, said Manning. That is what I came for. I want to ask your
help.

isten, declared Wrail, you can't be on arth, Manning. I say
something to you and you answer right back. That isn't possible. ou
can't hear anything I say until  minutes after I say it, and then I'd
have to wait another  minutes to hear your answer.

That's right, agreed the image, if you insist upon talking about the
velocity of light. We have something better than that.

We?

ussell age and myself. We have a two-way television apparatus that
works almost instantaneously. To all purposes, so far as the distance
between arth and allisto is concerned, it is instantaneous.

Wrail's aw fell. Well, I be damned. What have you two fellows been up
to now?

A lot, said Manning laconically. For one thing we are out to bust
Interplanetary ower. Bust them wide open. ear that, Wrail?

Wrail stared in stupefaction. Sure, I hear. But I can't believe it.

All right then, said Manning grimly, we'll give you proof. What
could you do, Ben, if we told you what was happening on the stock market
in New ork ... without you having to wait the  minutes it takes the
quotations to get here?

Wrail sprang to his feet. What could I do? Why, I could run the pants
off every trader in the echange! I could make a billion a minute! e
stopped and looked at the image. But this isn't like you. This isn't
the way you'd do things.

I don't want you to hurt anyone but hambers, said Manning. If
somebody else gets in the way, of course they have to take the rap along
with him. But I do want to give hambers a licking. That's what I came
here to see you about.

By eaven, reg, I'll do it, said Wrail. e stepped quickly forward,
held out his hand to close the deal, and encountered only air.

Manning's image threw back its head and laughed.

That's your proof, Ben. ood enough?

I'll say it is, said Wrail shakily, looking down at the solid-seeming
hand that his own had gone right through.

                                   

November , , was a day long remembered in financial circles
throughout the Solar System. The anthoor market opened easy with little
activity. Then a few stocks made fractional gains. Mining dropped
fractionally. Martian Irrigation still was uneplainably low, as was
luto hemical and Asteroid Mining.

Trading through two brokers, Ben Wrail bought , shares of enus
Farms, Inc. when the market opened at -. A few minutes later they
bought , shares of Spacesuits td. at -. The farm stocks
dropped off a point. Spacesuits gained a point. Then suddenly both rose.
In the second hour of trading the enus stocks had boomed a full five
points and Wrail sold. Ten minutes later they sagged. At the end of the
day they were off two points from the opening. In late afternoon Wrail
threw his , shares of Spacesuits on the market, sold them at an
even . Before the close they had dropped back with a gain of only
half a point over the opening.

Those were only two transactions. There were others. Spaceship
Fabrication climbed three points before it fell and Wrail cashed in on
that. Mercury Metals rose two points and crashed back to close with a
full point loss. Wrail sold ust before the break. e had realized a
cool half million in the day's trade.

The net day it was a million and then the man who had always been a
safe trader, who had always played the conservative side of the market,
apparently sure of his ground now, plunged deeper and deeper. It was
uncanny. Wrail knew when to buy and when to sell. Other traders watched
closely, followed his lead. e threw them off by using different brokers
to disguise his transactions.

ectic day followed hectic day. Ben Wrail did not appear on the floor.
alls to his office netted eactly nothing. Mr. Wrail was not in. So
sorry.

is brokers, well paid, were close-mouthed. They bought and sold. That
was all.

Seated in his office, Ben Wrail was busy watching two television screens
before him. One showed the board in the New ork echange. In the other
was the image of regory Manning, hunched in a chair in age's mountain
laboratory back on arth. And before reg likewise were two screens, one
showing the New ork echange board, the other trained on Ben Wrail's
office.

That Tourist stuff looks good, said reg. Why not buy a block of it?
I happen to know that hambers owns a few shares. e'll be dabbling in
it.

Ben Wrail grinned. It's made a couple of points, hasn't it? It's
selling here for  right now. In  minutes it'll be quoted at .

e picked up a telephone. Buy all you can of Tourist, he said. ight
away. I'll tell you when to sell. et rid of whatever you have in Titan
opper at :.

Better let go of your holdings of anthoor Dome, suggested reg. It's
beginning to slip.

I'll watch it, promised Ben. It may revive.

They lapsed into silence, watching the board in New ork.

ou know, reg, said Ben finally, I really didn't believe all this
was true until I saw those credit certificates materialize on my desk.

Simple, grunted reg. This thing we've got can take anything any
place. I could reach out there, grab you up and have you down here in a
split second.

Ben sucked his breath in between his teeth. I'm not doubting anything
any more. ou sent me half a billion two days ago. It's more than
doubled now.

e picked up the phone again and spoke to his broker on the other end.

nload anthoor Dome when she reaches .

                                   

The real furor came on the anthoor floor when Wrail cornered Titan
opper. Striking swiftly, he purchased the stock in huge blocks. The
shares rocketed as the echanges throughout the System were thrown into
an uproar. nder the cover of the ecitement he proceeded to corner
Spacesuits td. Spacesuits zoomed.

For two days the main echanges on four worlds were in a frenzy as
traders watched the shares climb swiftly. Operators representing
Interplanetary ower made offerings. No takers were reported. The shares
climbed.

Within one hour, however, the entire Wrail holdings in both stocks were
dumped on the market. The Interplanetary ower traders, frantic over the
prospect of losing control of the two important issues, bought heavily.
The price plummeted.

Spencer hambers lost three billion or more on the deal. Overnight Ben
Wrail had become a billionaire many times over. reg Manning added to
his own fortune.

We have enough, said reg. We've given hambers what he had coming to
him. et's call it off.

lad to, agreed Ben. It was ust too damned easy.

Be seeing you, Ben.

I'll get down to arth some day. ome see me when you have a minute.
Drop in for an evening.

That's an invitation, said reg. It's easy with this three-dimension
stuff.

e reached out a hand, snapped a control. The screens in Wrail's office
went dead.

Wrail reached for a cigar, lit it carefully. e leaned back in his
chair, put his feet on the desk.

By eaven, he said satisfiedly, I've never enoyed anything so much
in all my life.




AT IT


A giant cylindrical hull of finest beryl steel, the ship loomed in the
screen. A mighty ship, braced into absolute rigidity by monster cross
beams of shining steel. lowing under the blazing lamps that lighted the
scene, it towered into the shadows of the factory, dwarfing the
scurrying workmen who swarmed over it.

She's a beauty, said uss, puffing at his pipe.

reg nodded agreement. They're working on her day and night to get her
finished. We may need it some day and need it in a hurry. If hambers
really gets that machine of his to rolling, space will be the only place
big enough to hide in.

e chuckled, a grim chuckle, deep in his throat.

But we won't have to hide long. ust until we get organized and then
will come the time when we'll call for the showdown. hambers will have
to spread his cards.

uss snapped the television switch and the screen went blank. The
laboratory suddenly was a place of queer lights and shadows, bulging
with grotesque machines, with sprawling apparatus, a place that hinted
darkly of vast power and mighty forces.

The scientist sat up in his chair. We've come a long way, reg. A long,
long way. We have the greatest power man has ever known; we have an
almost incomprehensible space drive; we have three-dimensional
television.

And, said reg dryly, we took hambers to the cleaners on the
market.

They sat in silence. reg smelled the smoke from uss's pipe, mied with
the taint of lubricant and the faint lingering scent of ionized air.

We mustn't underrate hambers, however, he declared. The man made one
mistake. e underrated us. We can't repeat his mistake. e is dangerous
all the time. e will stop at nothing. Not even murder.

e's going easy now, said uss. e's hoping raven can find something
that will either equal our stuff or beat it. But raven isn't having any
luck. e's still driving himself on the radiation theory, but he doesn't
seem to make much headway.

If he got it, ust what would it mean?

lenty. With that he could turn all radiations in space to work. The
cosmics, heat, light, everything. Space is full of radiation.

If it hadn't been for Wilson, reg said, his voice a snarl, we
wouldn't have to be worrying about hambers. hambers wouldn't know
until we were ready to let him know.

Wilson! eaculated uss, suddenly leaning forward. I had forgotten
about Wilson. What do you say we try to find him?

                                   

arry Wilson sat at his table in the Martian lub and watched the eotic
Martian dance, performed by near-nude girls. Smoke trailed up lazily
from his drooping cigarette as he watched through squinted eyes. There
was something about the dance that got under Wilson's skin.

The music rose, then fell to whispering undertones and suddenly,
unepectedly, crashed and stopped. The girls were running from the
floor. A wave of smooth, polite applause rippled around the tables.

Wilson sighed and reached for his wine glass. e crushed the cigarette
into a tray and sipped his wine. e glanced around the room, scanning
the bobbing, painted faces of the night--the great, the near-great, the
near-enough-to-touch-the-great. Brokers and businessmen, artists and
writers and actors. There were others, too, queer night-life shadows
that no one knew much about, or that one heard too much about ... the
playboys and the ladies of family and fortune, correctly attired men,
gorgeously, sleekly attired women.

And--arry Wilson. The waiters called him Mr. Wilson. e heard people
whispering about him asking who he was. is soul soaked it in and cried
for more. ood food, good drinks, the pastels of the walls, the soft
lights and weird, eotic music. The cold but colorful correctness of it
all.

ust two months ago he had stood outside the club, a stranger in the
city, a mechanic from a little out-of-the-way laboratory, a man who was
paid a pittance for his skill. e had stood outside and watched his
employers walk up the steps and through the magic doors. e had watched
in bitterness....

But now!

The orchestra was striking up a tune. A blonde nodded at him from a
near-by table. Solemnly, with the buzz of wine in his brain and its
hotness in his blood, he returned the nod.

Someone was speaking to him, calling him by name. e looked around, but
there was no one looking at him now. And once again, through that flow
of music, through the hum of conversation, through the buzzing of his
own brain, came the voice, cold and sharp as steel:

arry Wilson!

It sent a shudder through him. e reached for the wine glass again, but
his hand stopped half-way to the stem, paused and trembled at what he
saw.

                                   

For there was a gray vagueness in front of him, a sort of shimmer of
nothingness, and out of that shimmer materialized a pencil.

As he watched, in stricken terror, the point of the pencil dropped to
the tablecloth and slowly, precisely, it started to move. e stared,
hypnotized, unbelieving, with the fingers of madness probing at his
brain. The pencil wrote:

    Wilson, you sold me out.

The man at the table tried to speak, tried to shriek, but his tongue and
throat were dry and only harsh breath rattled in his mouth.

The pencil moved on mercilessly:

    But you will pay. No matter where you go, I will find you. ou
    cannot hide from me.

The pencil slowly lifted its point from the table and suddenly was gone,
as if it had never been. Wilson, eyes wide and filled with terrible
fear, stared at the black words on the cloth.

    Wilson, you sold me out. But you will pay. No matter where you go, I
    will find you. ou cannot hide from me.

The music pulsated in the room, the hum of conversation ran like an
undertone, but Wilson did not hear. is entire consciousness was
centered on the writing, the letters and the words that filled his soul
with dread.

Something seemed to snap within him. The cold wind of terror reached out
and struck at him. e staggered from the chair. is hand swept the wine
glass from the table and it shattered into chiming shards.

They can't do this to me! he shrieked.

There was a silence in the room a silence of terrible accusation.
veryone was staring at him. yebrows raised.

                                   

A waiter was at his elbow. Do you feel ill, sir?

And then, on unsteady feet, he was being led away. Behind him he heard
the music once again, heard the rising hum of voices.

Someone set his hat on his head, was holding his coat. The cold air of
the night struck his face and the doors sighed closed behind him.

I'd take it easy going down the step, sir, counseled the doorman.

An aero-tai driver held open the door of the cab and saluted.

Where to, sir?

Wilson stumbled in and stammered out his address. The tai droned into
the traffic lane.

ands twitching, Wilson fumbled with the key, took minutes to open the
door into his apartment. Finally the lock clicked and he pushed open the
door. is questing finger found the wall switch. ight flooded the room.

Wilson heaved a sigh of relief. e felt safe here. This place belonged
to him. It was his home, his retreat....

A low laugh, hardly more than a chuckle, sounded behind him. e whirled
and for a moment, blinking in the light, he saw nothing. Then something
stirred by one of the windows, gray and vague, like a sheet of moving
fog.

As he watched, shrinking back against the wall, the grayness deepened,
took the form of a man. And out of that mistiness a face was etched, a
face that had no single line of humor in it, a bleak face with the fire
of anger in the eyes.

Manning! shrieked Wilson. Manning! e wheeled and sprinted for the
door, but the gray figure moved, too ... incredibly fast, as if it were
wind-blown vapor, and barred his path to the door.

Why are you running away? Manning's voice mocked. ertainly you
aren't afraid of me.

ook, Wilson whimpered, I didn't think of what it meant. I ust was
tired of working the way age made me work. Tired of the little salary I
got. I wanted money. I was hungry for money.

So you sold us out, said Manning.

No, cried Wilson, I didn't think of it that way. I didn't stop to
think.

Think now, then, said Manning gravely. Think of this. No matter where
you are, no matter where you go, no matter what you do, I'll always be
watching you, I'll never let you rest. I'll never give you a minute's
peace.

lease, pleaded Wilson. lease, go away and leave me. I'll give you
back the money ... there's some of it left.

ou sold out for twenty thousand, said Manning. ou could have gotten
twenty million. hambers would have paid that much to know what you
could tell him, because it was worth twenty billion.

Wilson's breath was coming in panting gasps. e dropped his coat and
backed away. The back of his knees collided with a chair and he folded
up, sat down heavily, still staring at the gray mistiness that was a
man.

Think of that, Wilson, Manning went on sneeringly. ou could have
been a millionaire. Maybe even a billionaire. ou could have had all the
fine things these other people have. But you only got twenty thousand.

What can I do? begged Wilson.

The misty face split in a sardonic grin.

I don't believe there's anything left for you to do.

Before Wilson's eyes the face dissolved, lost its lines, seemed to melt
away. Only streaming, swirling mist, then a slight refraction in the air
and then nothing.

Slowly Wilson rose to his feet, reached for the bottle of whiskey on the
table. is hand shook so that the liquor splashed. When he raised the
glass to his mouth, his still-shaking hand poured half the drink over
his white shirt front.




AT NIN


udwig Stutsman pressed his thin, straight lips together. So that's the
setup, he said.

Across the desk Spencer hambers studied the man. Stutsman was like a
wolf, lean and cruel and vicious. e even looked like a wolf, with his
long, thin face, his small, beady eyes, the thin, bloodless lips. But he
was the kind of man who didn't always wait for instructions, but went
ahead and used his own udgment. And in a ruthless sort of way, his
udgment was always right.

Only as a last resort, cautioned hambers, do I want you to use the
etreme measures you are so fond of using. If they should prove
necessary, we can always use them. But not yet. I want to settle this
thing in the quietest way possible. age and Manning are two men who
can't simply disappear. There'd be a hunt, an investigation, an ugly
situation.

I understand, agreed Stutsman. If something should happen to their
notes, if somebody could find them. erhaps you. If you found them on
your desk one morning.

The two men measured one another with their eyes, more like enemies
than men working for the same ends.

Not my desk, snapped hambers, raven's. So that raven could
discover this new energy. Whatever raven discovers belongs to
Interplanetary.

hambers rose from his chair and walked to the window, looked out. After
a moment's time, he turned and walked back again, sat down in his chair.
eaning back, he matched his fingertips, his teeth flashing in a grin
under his mustache.

I don't know anything about what's going on, he said. I don't even
know someone has discovered material energy. That's up to raven. e has
to find it. Both you and raven work alone. I know nothing about either
of you.

Stutsman's aw closed like a steel trap. I've always worked alone.

By the way, said hambers, the edge suddenly off his voice, how are
things going in the ovian confederacy? I trust you left everything in
good shape.

As good as could be epected, Stutsman replied. The people are still
uneasy, half angry. They still remember Mallory.

But Mallory, obected hambers, is on a prison ship. In near Mercury
now, I believe.

Stutsman shook his head. They still remember him. We'll have trouble
out there one of these days.

I would hate to have that happen, remarked hambers softly. I would
regret it very much. I sent you out there to see that nothing happened.

The trouble out there won't be a flash to this thing you were telling
me about, snapped Stutsman.

I'm leaving that in your hands, too, hambers told him. I know you
can take care of it.

Stutsman rose. I can take care of it.

I'm sure you can, hambers said.

e remained standing after Stutsman left, looking at the door through
which the man had gone. Maybe it had been a mistake to call Stutsman in
from allisto. Maybe it was a mistake to use Stutsman at all. e didn't
like a lot of things the man did ... or the way he did them. Brutal
things.

                                   

Slowly hambers sat down again and his face grew hard.

e had built an empire of many worlds. That couldn't be done with gentle
methods and no sure goal. Fighting every inch from planet to planet, he
had used power to gain power. And now that empire was threatened by two
men who had found a greater power. That threat had to be smashed! It
would be smashed!

hambers leaned forward and pressed a buzzer.

es, Mr. hambers? said a voice in the communicator.

Send Dr. raven in, commanded hambers.

raven came in, slouchily, his hair standing on end, his eyes peering
through the thick-lensed glasses.

ou sent for me, he growled, taking a chair.

es, I did, said hambers. ave a drink?

No. And no smoke either.

hambers took a long cigar from the bo on his desk, clipped off the end
and rolled it in his mouth.

                                   

I'm a busy man, raven reminded him.

uckering lines of amusement wrinkled hambers' eyes as he lit up,
watching raven.

ou do seem to be busy, Doctor, he said. I only wish you had
something concrete to report.

The scientist bristled. I may have in a few days, if you leave me alone
and let me work.

I presume that you are still working on your radiation collector. Any
progress?

Not too much. ou can't epect a man to turn out discoveries to order.
I'm working almost night and day now. If the thing can be solved, I'll
solve it.

hambers glowed. eep up the good work. But I wanted to talk to you
about something else. ou heard, I suppose, that I lost a barrel of
money on the anthoor echange.

raven smiled, a sardonic twisting of his lips. I heard something about
it.

I thought you had, said hambers sourly. If not, you would have been
the only one who hadn't heard how Ben Wrail took hambers for a ride.

e really took you then, commented raven. I thought maybe it was
ust one of those stories.

e took me, but that's not what's worrying me. I want to know how he
did it. No man, not even the most astute student of the market, could
have foretold the trend of the market the way he did. And Wrail isn't
the most astute. It isn't natural when a man who has always played the
safe side suddenly turns the market upside down. ven less natural when
he never makes a mistake.

Well, demanded raven, what do you want me to do about it? I'm a
scientist. I've never owned a share of stock in my life.

There's an angle to it that might interest you, said hambers
smoothly, leaning back, puffing at the cigar. Wrail is a close friend
of Manning. And Wrail himself didn't have the money it took to swing
those deals. Somebody furnished that money.

Manning? asked raven.

What do you think?

If Manning's mied up in it, said raven acidly, there isn't anything
any of us can do about it. ou're bucking money and genius together.
This Manning is no slouch of a scientist himself and age is better.
They're a combination.

                                   

ou think they're good? asked hambers.

ood? Didn't they discover material energy? The scientist glowered at
his employer. That ought to be answer enough.

es, I know, hambers agreed irritably. But can you tell me how they
worked this market deal?

raven grimaced. I can guess. Those boys didn't stop with ust finding
how to harness material energy. They probably have more things than you
can even suspect. They were working with force fields, you remember,
when they stumbled onto the energy. Force fields are something we don't
know much about. A man monkeying around with them is apt to find almost
anything.

What are you getting at?

My guess would be that they have a new kind of television working in
the fourth dimension, using time as a factor. It would penetrate
anything. Nothing could stop it. It could go anywhere, at a speed many
times the speed of light ... almost instantaneously.

hambers sat upright in his chair. Are you sure about this?

raven shook his head. ust a guess. I tried to figure out what I would
do if I were age and Manning and had the things they had. That's all.

And what would you do?

raven smiled dourly. I'd be using that television right in this
office, he said. I'd keep you and me under observation all the time.
If what I think is true, Manning is watching us now and has heard every
word we said.

hambers' face was a harsh mask of anger. I don't believe it could be
done!

Doctor raven is right, said a quiet voice.

hambers swung around in his chair and gasped. reg Manning stood inside
the room, ust in front of the desk.

I hope you don't mind, said reg. I've been wanting to have a talk
with you.

raven leaped to his feet, his eyes shining. Three dimensions! he
whispered. ow did you do it?

reg chuckled. I haven't patented the idea, Doctor. I'd rather not tell
you ust now.

ou will accept my congratulations, however? asked raven.

That's generous of you. I really hadn't epected this much.

I mean it, said raven. Damned if I don't. hambers was on his feet,
leaning across the desk, with his hand held out. reg's right hand came
out slowly.

Sorry, I really can't shake hands, he said. I'm not here, you know.
ust my image.

hambers' hand dropped to the desk. Stupid of me not to realize that.
ou looked so natural. e sat back in his chair again, brushed his gray
mustache. A smile twisted his lips. So you've been watching me?

Off and on, reg said.

And what is the occasion of this visit? asked hambers. ou could
have held a distinct advantage by remaining unseen. I didn't entirely
believe what raven told me, you know.

That isn't the point at all, declared reg. Maybe we can get to
understand one another.

So you're ready to talk business.

Not in the sense you mean, reg said. I'm not willing to make
concessions, but there's no reason why we have to fight one another.

Why, no, said hambers, there's no reason for that. I'll be willing
to buy your discovery.

I wouldn't sell it to you, reg told him.

ou wouldn't? Why not? I'm prepared to pay for it.

ou'd pay the price, all right. Anything I asked ... even if it
bankrupted you. Then you'd mark it down to loss, and scrap material
energy. And I'll tell you why.

                                   

A terrible silence hung in the room as the two men eyed one another
across the table.

ou wouldn't use it, reg went on, because it would remove the
stranglehold you have on the planets. It would make power too cheap. It
would eliminate the necessity of your rented accumulators. The ovian
moons and Mars could stand on their feet without the power you ship to
them. ou could make billions in legitimate profits selling the
apparatus to manufacture the energy ... but you wouldn't want that. ou
want to be dictator of the Solar System. And that is what I intend to
stop.

isten, Manning, said hambers, you're a reasonable man. et's talk
this thing over without anger. What do you plan to do?

I could put my material engines on the market, said reg. That would
ruin you. ou wouldn't move an accumulator after that. our
Interplanetary stock wouldn't be worth the paper it is written on.
Material energy would wipe you out.

ou forget I have franchises on those planets, hambers reminded him.
I'd fight you in the courts until hell froze over.

I'd prove convenience, economy and necessity. Any court in any land, on
any planet, would rule for me.

hambers shook his head. Not Martian or ovian courts. I'd tell them to
rule for me and the courts outside of arth do what I tell them to.

                                   

reg straightened and backed from the desk. I hate to ruin a man.
ou've worked hard. ou've built a great company. I would be willing, in
return for a hands-off policy on your part, to hold up any announcement
of my material energy until you had time to get out, to save what you
could.

ard fury masked hambers' face. ou'll never build a material energy
engine outside your laboratory. Don't worry about ruining me. I won't
allow you to stand in my way. I hope you understand.

I understand too well. But even if you are a dictator out on Mars and
enus, even if you do own Mercury and boss the ovian confederacy,
you're ust a man to me. A man who stands for things that I don't like.

reg stopped and his eyes were like ice crystals.

ou talked to Stutsman today, he said. If I were you, I wouldn't let
Stutsman do anything rash. uss age and I might have to fight back.

Mockery tinged hambers' voice. Am I to take this as a declaration of
war, Mr. Manning?

Take it any way you like, reg said. I came here to give you a
proposition, and you tell me you're going to smash me. All I have to say
to you, hambers, is this--when you get ready to smash me, you'd better
have a deep, dark hole all picked out for yourself to hide in. Because
I'll hand you back ust double anything you hand out.




AT TN


One of us will have to watch all the time, reg told uss. We can't
take any chances. Stutsman will try to reach us sooner or later and we
have to be ready for him.

e glanced at the new radar screen they had set up that morning beside
the bank of other controls. Any ship coming within a hundred miles of
the laboratory would be detected instantly and pinpointed.

The board flashed now. In the screen they saw a huge passenger ship
spearing down toward the airport south of them.

With the port that close, said uss, we'll get a lot of signals.

I ordered the Belgium factory to rush work on the ship, said reg.
But it will be a couple of weeks yet. We ust have to sit tight and
wait. As soon as we have the ship we'll start in on hambers; but until
we get the ship, we ust have to dig in and stay on the defensive.

e studied the scene in the screen. The ship had leveled off, was
banking in to the port. is eyes turned away, took in the laboratory
with its crowding mass of machinery.

We don't want to fool ourselves about hambers, he said. e may not
have the power here on arth that he does on the other planets, but he's
got plenty. Feeling the way he does, he'll try to finish us off in a
hurry now.

uss reached out to the table that stood beside the bank of controls and
picked up a small, complicated mechanism. Its face bore nine dials, with
the needles on three of them apparently registering, the other si
motionless.

What is that? asked reg.

A mechanical detective, said uss. A sort of mechanical shadow. While
you were busy with the stock market stunt, I made several of them. One
for Wilson and another for hambers and still another for raven. e
hoisted and lowered the one in his hand. This one is for Stutsman.

A shadow? asked reg. Do you mean that thing will trail Stutsman?

Not only trail him, said uss. It will find him, wherever he may be.
Some obect every person wears or carries is made of iron or some other
magnetic metal. This 'shadow' contains a tiny bit of that ridiculous
military decoration that Stutsman never allows far away from him. Find
that decoration and you find Stutsman. In another one I have a chunk of
Wilson's belt buckle, that college buckle, you know, that he's so proud
of. hambers has a ring made of a piece of meteoric iron and that's the
bait for another machine. ave a tiny piece off raven's spectacles in
his machine. It was easy to get the stuff. The force field enables a man
to reach out and take anything he wants to, from a massive machine to a
microscopic bit of matter. It was a cinch to get the stuff I needed.

uss chuckled and put the machine back on the table. e gestured toward
it.

It maintains a tiny field similar to our television field, he
eplained. But it's modified along a special derivation with a magnetic
result. It can follow and find the original mass of any metallic
substance it may contain.

lever, commented reg.

uss lit his pipe, puffed comfortably. We needed something like that.

The red light on the board snapped on and blinked. uss reached out and
slammed home the lever, twirled dials. It was only another passenger
ship. They relaed, but not too much.

                                   

I wonder what he's up to, said uss.

Stutsman's car had stopped in the dock section of New ork. rumbling,
rotting piers and old tumbledown warehouses, deserted and unused since
the last ship sailed the ocean before giving way to air commerce, loomed
darkly, like grim ghosts, in the darkness.

Stutsman had gotten out of the car and said: Wait here.

es, sir, said the voice of the driver.

Stutsman strode away, down a dark street. The televisor kept pace with
him and on the screen he could be seen as a darker shape moving among
the shadows of that old, almost forgotten section of the Solar System's
greatest city.

Another shadow detached itself from the darkness of the street, shuffled
toward Stutsman.

Sir, said a whining voice, I haven't eaten ...

There was a swift movement as Stutsman's stick lashed out, a thud as it
connected with the second shadow's head. The shadow crumpled on the
pavement. Stutsman strode on.

reg sucked in his breath. e isn't very sociable tonight.

Stutsman ducked into an alley where even deeper darkness lay. uss, with
a delicate adustment, slid the televisor along, closer to Stutsman,
determined not to lose sight of him for an instant.

The man suddenly turned into a doorway so black that nothing could be
seen. Sounds of sharp, impatient rappings came out of the screen as
Stutsman struck the door with his stick.

Brilliant illumination sprang out over the doorway, but Stutsman seemed
not to see it, went on knocking. The colors on the screen were
peculiarly distorted.

ltra-violet, grunted reg. Whoever he's calling on wants to have a
good look before letting anybody in.

The door creaked open and a shaft of normal light spewed out into the
street, turning its murkiness to pallid yellow.

Stutsman stepped inside.

The man at the door erked his head. Back room, he said.

                                   

The televisor slid through the door into the lighted room behind
Stutsman. Dust lay thick on the woodwork and floors. atches of plaster
had broken away. Furrows zigzagged across the floor, marking the path of
heavy boes or furniture which had been pushed along in utter disdain of
the flooring. heap wall-paper hung in tatters from the walls, streaked
with water from some broken pipe.

But the back room was a startling contrast to the first. ich,
comfortable furniture filled it. The floor was covered with a
steel-cloth rug and steel-cloth hangings, colorfully painted, hid the
walls.

A man sat under a lamp, reading a newspaper. e rose to his feet, like
the sudden uncoiling of springs.

uss gasped. That face was one of the best known faces in the entire
Solar System. A ratlike face, with cruel cunning printed on it that had
been on front pages and T screens often, but never for pay.

Scorio! whispered uss.

reg nodded and his lips were drawn tight.

Stutsman, said Scorio, surprised. ou're the last person in the world
I was epecting. ome in. ave a chair. Make yourself comfortable.

Stutsman snorted. This isn't a social call.

I didn't figure it was, replied the gangster, but sit down anyway.

ingerly Stutsman sat down on the edge of a chair, hunched forward.
Scorio resumed his seat and waited.

I have a ob for you, Stutsman announced bluntly.

Fine. It isn't often you have one for me. Three-four years ago, wasn't
it?

We may be watched, warned Stutsman.

The mobster started from his chair, his eyes darting about the room.

Stutsman grunted disgustedly. If we're watched, there isn't anything we
can do about it.

We can't, huh? snarled the gangster. Why not?

Because the watcher is on the West oast. We can't reach him. If he's
watching, he can see every move we make, hear every word we say.

Who is it?

                                   

reg Manning or uss age, said Stutsman. ou've heard of them?

Sure. I heard of them.

They have a new kind of television, said Stutsman. They can see and
hear everything that's happening on arth, perhaps in all the Solar
System. But I don't think they're watching us now. raven has a machine
that can detect their televisor. It registers certain field effects they
use. They weren't watching when I left raven's laboratory ust a few
minutes ago. They may have picked me up since, but I don't think so.

So raven has made a detector, said reg calmly. e can tell when
we're watching now.

e's a clever cuss, agreed uss.

Take a look at that machine now, urged Scorio. See if they're
watching. ou shouldn't have come here. ou should have let me know and
I would have met you some place. I can't have people knowing where my
hideout is.

uiet down, snapped Stutsman. I haven't got the machine. It weighs
half a ton.

Scorio sank deeper into his chair, worried. Do you want to take a
chance and talk business?

ertainly. That's why I'm here. This is the proposition. Manning and
age are working in a laboratory out on the West oast, in the
mountains. I'll give you the eact location later. They have some papers
we want. We wouldn't mind if something happened to the laboratory. It
might, for eample blow up. But we want the papers first.

                                   

Scorio said nothing. is face was quiet and cunning.

ive me the papers, said Stutsman, and I'll see that you get to any
planet you want to. And I'll give you two hundred thousand in
Interplanetary redit certificates. ive me proof that the laboratory
blew up or melted down or something else happened to it and I'll boost
the figure to five hundred thousand.

Scorio did not move a muscle as he asked: Why don't you have some of
your own mob do this ob?

Because I can't be connected with it in any way, said Stutsman. If
you slip up and something happens, I won't be able to do a thing for
you. That's why the price is high.

The gangster's eyes slitted. If the papers are worth that much to you,
why wouldn't they be worth as much to me?

They wouldn't be worth a dime to you.

Why not?

Because you couldn't read them, said Stutsman.

I can read, retorted the gangster.

Not the kind of language on those papers. There aren't more than two
dozen people in the Solar System who could read it, perhaps a dozen who
could understand it, maybe half a dozen who could follow the directions
in the papers. e leaned forward and abbed a forefinger at the
gangster. And there are only two people in the System who could write
it.

What the hell kind of a language is it that only two dozen people could
read?

It isn't a language, really. It's mathematics.

Oh, arithmetic.

No, Stutsman said. Mathematics. ou see? ou don't even know the
difference between the two, so what good would the papers do you?

Scorio nodded. eah, you're right.




AT N


The aris-Berlin epress thundered through the night, a gigantic ship
that rode high above the arth. Far below one could see the dim lights
of eastern urope.

arry Wilson pressed his face against the window, staring down. There
was nothing to see but the tiny lights. They were alone, he and the
other occupants of the ship ... alone in the dark world that surrounded
them.

But Wilson sensed some other presence in the ship, someone besides the
pilot and his mechanics up ahead, the hostess and the three stodgy
traveling men who were his fellow passengers.

Wilson's hair ruffled at the base of his skull, tingling with an unknown
fear that left him shaken.

A voice whispered in his ear: arry Wilson. So you are running away!

ust a tiny voice that seemed hardly a voice at all, it seemed at once
to come from far away and yet from very near. The voice, with an edge of
coldness on it, was one he never would forget.

e cowered in his seat, whimpering.

The voice came again: Didn't I tell you that you couldn't run away?
That no matter where you went, I'd find you?

o away, Wilson whispered huskily. eave me alone. aven't you
hounded me enough?

No, answered the voice, not enough. Not yet. ou sold us out. ou
warned hambers about our energy and now hambers is sending men to kill
us. But they won't succeed, Wilson.

ou can't hurt me, said Wilson defiantly. ou can't do anything but
talk to me. ou're trying to drive me mad, but you can't. I won't let
you. I'm not going to pay any more attention to you.

The whisper chuckled.

ou can't, argued Wilson wildly. All you can do is talk to me. ou've
never done anything but that. ou drove me out of New ork and out of
ondon and now you're driving me out of aris. But Berlin is as far as I
will go. I won't listen to you any more.

Wilson, whispered the voice, look inside your bag. The bag, Wilson,
where you are carrying that money. That stack of credit certificates.
Almost eleven thousand dollars, what is left of the twenty thousand
hambers paid you.

With a wild cry Wilson clawed at his bag, snapped it open, pawed through
it.

                                   

The credit certificates were gone!

ou took my money, he shrieked. ou took everything I had. I haven't
got a cent. Nothing ecept a few dollars in my pocket.

ou haven't got that either, Wilson, whispered the voice.

There was a sound of ripping cloth as something like a great, powerful
hand flung aside Wilson's coat, tore away the inside pocket. There was a
brief flash of a wallet and a bundle of papers, which vanished.

The hostess was hurrying toward him.

Is there something wrong?

They took ... Wilson began and stopped.

What could he tell her? ould he say that a man half way across the
world had robbed him?

The three traveling men were looking at him.

I'm sorry, miss, he stammered. I really am. I fell asleep and
dreamed.

e sat down again, shaken. Shivering, he huddled back into the corner of
his seat. is hands eplored the torn coat pocket. e was stranded, high
in the air, somewhere between aris and Berlin ... stranded without
money, without a passport, with nothing but the clothes he wore and the
few personal effects in his bag.

Fighting to calm himself, he tried to reason out his plight. The plane
was entering the entral uropean Federation and that, definitely, was
no place to be without a passport or without visible means of support. A
thousand possibilities flashed through his mind. They might think he was
a spy. e might be cited for illegal entry. e might be framed by secret
police.

Terror perched on his shoulder and whispered to him. e shivered
violently and drew farther back into the corner of the seat. e clasped
his hands, beat them against his huddled knees.

e would cable friends back in America and have them identify him and
vouch for his character. e would borrow some money from them, ust
enough to get back to America. But whom would he cable? And with aching
bitterness in his breast, arry Wilson came face to face with the
horrible realization that nowhere in the world, nowhere in the Solar
System, was there a single person who was his friend. There was no one
to help him.

e bowed his head in his hands and sobbed, his shoulders erking
spasmodically, the sobs racking his body.

The traveling men stared at him unable to understand. The hostess looked
briskly helpless. Wilson knew he looked like a scared fool and he didn't
care.

e was scared.

                                   

regory Manning riffled the sheaf of credit certificates, the wallet,
the passport and pile of other papers that lay upon the desk in front of
him.

That closes one little incident, he said grimly. That takes care of
our friend Wilson.

Maybe you were a bit too harsh with him, reg, suggested ussell age.

reg shook his head. e was a traitor, the lowest thing alive. e sold
the confidence we placed in him. e traded something that was not his to
trade. e did it for money and now I've taken that money from him.

e shoved the pile of certificates to one side.

Now I've got this stuff, he said, I don't know what to do with it. We
don't want to keep it.

Why not send it to hambers? suggested uss. e will find the
passport and the money on his desk in the morning. ive him something to
think about tomorrow.




AT TW


Scorio snarled at the four men: I want you to get the thing done right.
I don't want bungling. nderstand?

The bulky, flat-faced man with the scar across his cheek shuffled
uneasily. We went over it a dozen times. We know ust what to do.

e grinned at Scorio, but the grin was lopsided, more like a sneering
grimace. At one time the man had failed to side-step a heat ray and it
had left a neat red line drawn across the right cheek, nipped the end of
the ear.

All right, ete, said Scorio, glaring at the man, your ob is the
heavy work, so ust keep your mind on it. ou've got the two heaters and
the kit.

ete grinned lopsidedly again. eah, my own kit. I can open anything
hollow with this rig.

ou got a real ob tonight, snarled Scorio. Two doors and a safe.
Sure you can do it?

ust leave it to me, ete growled.

hizzy, you're to pilot, Scorio snapped. now the coordinates?

Sure, said hizzy, know them by heart. Do it with my eyes shut.

eep your eyes open. We can't have anything go wrong. This is too
important. ou swoop in at top speed and land on the roof. Stand by the
controls and keep a hand on the big heater ust in case of trouble.
ete, Ma and eg will go to the lockdoor. eg will stay there with the
buzzer and three drums of ammunition.

e whirled on eg. ou got that ammunition?

eg nodded emphatically. Four drums of it, he said. One solid round
in the gun. Another drum of solid and two eplosive.

There's a thousand rounds in each drum, snapped Scorio, but they last
only a minute, so do your firing in bursts.

I ain't handled buzzers all these years without knowing something about
them.

There's only two men there, said Scorio, and they'll probably be
asleep. ome down with your motor dead. The lab roof is thick and the
plane landing on those thick tires won't wake them. But be on your guard
all the time. ete and Ma will go through the lockdoor into the
laboratory and open the safe. Dump all the papers and money and whatever
else you find into the bags and then get out fast. op into the plane
and take off. When you're clear of the building, turn the heaters on it.
I want it melted down and the men and stuff inside with it. Don't leave
even a button unmelted. et it?

                                   

Sure, chief, said ete. e dusted his hands together.

Now get going. Beat it.

The four men turned and filed out of the room, through the door leading
to the tumbledown warehouse where was hidden the streamlined metal ship.
Swiftly they entered it and the ship nosed gently upward, blasting out
through a broken, frameless skylight, climbing up and up, over the
gleaming spires of New ork.

Back in the room hung with steel-cloth curtains, alone, Scorio lit a
cigarette and chuckled. They won't have a chance, he said.

Who won't? asked a tiny voice from almost in front of him.

Why, Manning and age ... said Scorio, and then stopped. The fire of
the match burned down and scorched his fingers. e dropped it. Who
asked that? he roared.

I did, said the piping voice.

Scorio looked down. A three-inch man sat on a matchbo on the desk!

Who are you? the gangster shouted.

I'm Manning, said the little man. The one you're going to kill. Don't
you remember?

Damn you! shrieked Scorio. is hand flipped open a drawer and pulled
out a flame pistol. The muzzle of the pistol came up and blasted.
Screwed down to its smallest diameter, the gun's aim was deadly. A
straight lance of flame, no bigger than a pencil, streamed out, engulfed
the little man, bored into the table top. The bo of matches eploded
with a gush of red that was a dull flash against the blue blaze of the
gun.

But the figure of the man stood within the flame! Stood there and
waved an arm at Scorio. The piping voice came out of the heart of the
gun's breath.

Maybe I'd better get a bit smaller. Make me harder to hit. More sport
that way.

                                   

Scorio's finger lifted from the trigger. The flame snapped off.
aboriously climbing out of the still smoking furrow left in the oaken
table top was reg Manning, not more than an inch tall now.

The gangster laid the gun on the table, stepped closer, warily. With the
palm of a mighty hand he swatted viciously at the little figure.

I got you now!

But the figure seemed to ooze upright between his fingers, calmly
stepped off his hand onto the table. And now it began to grow. Watching
it, Scorio saw it grow to si inches and there it stopped.

What are you? he breathed.

I told you, said the little image. I'm regory Manning. The man you
set out to kill. I've watched every move you've made and known
everything you planned.

But that isn't possible, protested Scorio. ou're out on the West
oast. This is some trick. I'm ust seeing things.

ou aren't seeing anything imaginary. I'm really here, in this room
with you. I could lift my finger and kill you if I wished ... and maybe
I should.

Scorio stepped back a pace.

But I'm not going to, said Manning. I have something better saved for
you. Something more appropriate.

ou can't touch me!

ook, said Manning sternly. e pointed his finger at a chair. It
suddenly grew cloudy, became a wisp of trailing smoke, was gone.

The gangster backed away, eyes glued to the spot where the chair had
vanished.

ook here, piped the little voice. Scorio erked his head around and
looked.

The chair was in Manning's hand. A tiny chair, but the very one that had
disappeared from the room a moment before.

Watch out! warned Manning, and heaved the chair. The tiny chair
seemed to float in the air. Then with a rush it gathered speed, grew
larger. In a split second it was a full-sized chair and it was hurtling
straight at the gangster's head.

With a strangled cry Scorio threw up his arms. The chair crashed into
him, bowled him over.

Now do you believe me? demanded Manning.

Scrambling to his feet, Scorio gibbered madly, for the si-inch figure
was growing. e became as large as the average man, and then much
larger. is head cleared the high ceiling by scant inches. is mighty
hands reached out for the gangster.

Scorio scuttled away on hands and knees, yelping with terror.

owerful hands seemed to seize and lift him. The room was blotted out.
The arth was gone. e was in a place where there was nothing. No light,
no heat, no gravitation. For one searing, blasting second he seemed to
be floating in strangely suspended animation. Then with a olt he became
aware of new surroundings.

e blinked his eyes and looked around. e was in a great laboratory that
hummed faintly with the suggestion of terrific power, that smelled of
ozone and seemed filled with gigantic apparatus.

Two men stood in front of him.

e staggered back.

Manning! he gasped.

Manning grinned savagely at him. Sit down, Scorio. ou won't have long
to wait. our boys will be along any minute now.

                                   

hizzy crouched over the controls, his eyes on the navigation chart.
Only the thin screech of parted air disturbed the silence of the ship.
The high scream and the slow, precise snack-snack of cards as eg and
Ma played a game of double solitaire with a cold, emotionless
precision.

The plane was near the stratosphere, well off the traveled air lanes. It
was running without lights, but the cabin bulbs were on, carefully
shielded.

ete sat in the co-pilot's chair beside hizzy. is blank,
epressionless eyes stared straight ahead.

I don't like this ob, he complained.

Why not? asked hizzy.

age and Manning aren't the kind of guys a fellow had ought to be
fooling around with. They ain't ust chumps. ou fool with characters
like them and you got trouble.

hizzy growled at him disgustedly, bent to his controls.

Straight ahead was a thin sliver of a dying Moon that gave barely
enough illumination to make out the great, rugged blocks of the
mountains, like dark, shadowy brush-strokes on a newly started canvas.

ete shuddered. There was something about the thin, watery moonlight,
and those brush-stroke hills....

It seems funny up here, he said.

ell, growled hizzy, you're going soft in your old age.

Silence fell between the two. The snack-snack of the cards continued.

ou ain't got nothing to be afraid of, hizzy told ete. This tub is
the safest place in the world. She's overpowered a dozen times. She can
outfly anything in the air. She's rayproof and bulletproof and
bombproof. Nothing can hurt us.

But ete wasn't listening. That moonlight makes a man see things. Funny
things. ike pictures in the night.

ou're balmy, declared hizzy.

ete started out of his seat. is voice gurgled in his throat. e
pointed with a shaking finger out into the night.

ook! he yelled ook!

hizzy rose out of his seat ... and froze in sudden terror.

Straight ahead of the ship, etched in silvery moon-lines against the
background of the star-sprinkled sky, was a grim and terrible face.

It was as big and hard as a mountain.




AT TITN


The ship was silent now. ven the whisper of the cards had stopped. eg
and Ma were on their feet, startled by the cries of ete and hizzy.

It's Manning! shrieked ete. e's watching us!

hizzy's hand whipped out like a striking snake toward the controls and,
as he grasped them, his face went deathly white. For the controls were
locked! They resisted all the strength he threw against them and the
ship still bore on toward that mocking face that hung above the arth.

Do something! screamed Ma. ou damn fool, do something!

I can't, moaned hizzy. The ship is out of control.

It seemed impossible. That ship was fast and tricky and it had reserve
power far beyond any possible need. It handled like a dream ... it was
tops in aircraft. But there was no doubt that some force more powerful
than the engines and controls of the ship itself had taken over.

Manning's got us! squealed ete. We came out to get him and now he
has us instead!

The craft was gaining speed. The whining shriek of the air against its
plates grew thinner and higher. istening, one could almost feel and
hear the sucking of the mighty power that pulled it at an ever greater
pace through the tenuous atmosphere.

The face was gone from the sky now. Only the Moon remained, the Moon and
the brush-stroke mountains far below.

Then, suddenly, the speed was slowing and the ship glided downward, down
into the saw-teeth of the mountains.

We're falling! yelled Ma, and hizzy growled at him.

But they weren't falling. The ship leveled off and floated, suspended
above a sprawling laboratory upon a mountain top.

That's Manning's laboratory, whispered ete in terror-stricken tones.

The levers yielded unepectedly. hizzy flung the power control over,
drove the power of the accumulator bank, all the reserve, into the
engines. The ship lurched, but did not move. The engines whined and
screamed in torture. The cabin's interior was filled with a blast of
heat, the choking odor of smoke and hot rubber. The heavy girders of the
frame creaked under the mighty forward thrust of the engines ... but the
ship stood still, frozen above that laboratory in the hills.

hizzy, hauling back the lever, turned around, pale. is hand began
clawing for his heat gun. Then he staggered back. For there were only
two men in the cabin with him--eg and Ma. ete had gone!

e ust disappeared, Ma abbered. e was standing there in front of
us. Then all at once he seemed to fade, as if he was turning into smoke.
Then he was gone.

                                   

Something had descended about ete. There was no sound, no light, no
heat. e had no sense of weight. It was as if, suddenly, his mind had
become disembodied.

Seeing and hearing and awareness came back to him as one might turn on a
light. From the blackness and the eventless eistence of a split second
before, he was catapulted into a world of light and sound.

It was a world that hummed with power, that was ablaze with light, a
laboratory that seemed crammed with mighty banks of massive machinery,
lighted by great globes of creamy brightness, shedding an illumination
white as sunlight, yet shadowless as the light of a cloudy day.

Two men stood in front of him, looking at him, one with a faint smile on
his lips, the other with lines of fear etched across his face. The
smiling one was regory Manning and the one who was afraid was Scorio!

With a start, ete snatched his pistol from its holster. The sights came
up and lined on Manning as he pressed the trigger. But the lancing heat
that sprang from the muzzle of the gun never reached Manning. It seemed
to strike an obstruction less than a foot away. It mushroomed with a
flare of scorching radiance that drove needles of agony into the
gangster's body.

is finger released its pressure and the gun dangled limply from his
hand. e moaned with the pain of burns upon his unprotected face and
hands. e beat feebly at tiny, licking blazes that ran along his
clothing.

Manning was still smiling at him.

ou can't reach me, ete, he said. ou can only hurt yourself. ou're
enclosed within a solid wall of force that matter cannot penetrate.

A voice came from one corner of the room: I'll bring hizzy down net.

ete whirled around and saw ussell age for the first time. The
scientist sat in front of a great control board, his swift, skillful
fingers playing over the banks of keys, his eyes watching the instrument
and the screen that slanted upward from the control banks.

ete felt dizzy as he stared at the screen. e could see the interior of
the ship he had been yanked from a moment before. e could see his three
companions, talking ecitedly, frightened by his disappearance.

                                   

is eyes flicked away from the screen, looked up through the skylight
above him. Outlined against the sky hung the ship. At the nose and
stern, two hemispheres of blue-white radiance fitted over the metal
framework, like the aws of a powerful vise, holding the craft
immovable.

is gaze went back to the screen again, ust in time to see hizzy
disappear. It was as if the man had been a mere figure chalked upon a
board ... and then someone had taken a sponge and wiped him out.

uss's fingers were flying over the keys. is thumb reached out and
tripped a lever. There was a slight hum of power.

And hizzy stood beside him.

hizzy did not pull his gun. e whimpered and cowered within the
invisible cradle of force.

ou're yellow, ete snarled at him, but hizzy only covered his eyes
with his arms.

ook, boss, said ete, addressing Scorio, what are you doing here? We
left you back in New ork.

Scorio did not answer. e merely glared. ete lapsed into silence,
watching.

                                   

Manning stood poised before the captives, rocking back and forth on his
heels.

A nice bag for one evening, he told uss.

uss grinned and stoked up his pipe.

Manning turned to the gangster chief. What do you think we ought to do
with these fellows? We can't leave them in those force shells too long
because they'll die for lack of air. And we can't let them loose because
they might use their guns on us.

isten, Manning, Scorio rasped hoarsely, ust name your price to let
us loose. We'll do anything you want.

Manning drew his mouth down. I can't think of a thing. We ust don't
seem to have any use for you.

Then what in hell, the gangster asked shakily, are you going to do
with us?

ou know, said Manning, I may be a bit old-fashioned along some
lines. Maybe I am. I ust don't like the idea of killing people for
money. I don't like people stealing things other people have worked hard
to get. I don't like thieves and murderers and thugs corrupting city
governments, taking tribute on every man, woman and child in our big
cities.

But look here, Manning, pleaded Scorio, we'd be good citizens if we
ust had a chance.

Manning's face hardened. ou sent these men here to kill us tonight,
didn't you?

Well, not eactly. Stutsman kind of wanted you killed, but I told the
boys ust to get the stuff in the safe and never mind killing you. I
said to them that you were pretty good eggs and I didn't like to bump
you off, see?

I see, said Manning.

e turned his back on Scorio and started to walk away. The gangster
chief came half-way out of his chair, and as he did so, uss reached out
a single finger and tapped a key. Scorio screamed and beat with his
fists against the wall of force that had suddenly formed about him. That
single tap on the great keyboard had sprung a trap, had been the one
factor necessary to bring into being a force shell already spun and
waiting for him.

Manning did not even turn around at Scorio's scream. e slowly paced his
way down the line of standing gangsters. e stopped in front of ete and
looked at him.

ete, he said, you've sprung a good many prisons, haven't you?

There ain't a ug in the System that can hold me, ete boasted, and
that's a fact.

I believe there's one that could, reg told him. One that no man has
ever escaped from, or ever will.

What's that? demanded ete.

The ulcan Fleet, said reg.

ete looked into the eyes of the man before him and read the purpose in
those eyes. Don't send me there! Send me any place but there!

reg turned to uss and nodded. uss's fingers played their tune of doom
upon the keyboard. is thumb depressed a lever. With a roar five
gigantic material energy engines screamed with thrumming power.

ete disappeared.

The engines roared with thunderous throats, a roar that seemed to drown
the laboratory in solid waves of sound. A curious refractive effect
developed about the straining hulks as space near them bent under their
lashing power.

Months ago uss and reg had learned a better way of transmitting power
than by metal bars or through conducting beams. Beams of such power as
were developing now would have smashed atoms to protons and electrons.
Through a window in the side of the near engine, reg could see the iron
ingot used as fuel dwindling under the sucking force.

                                   

The droning died and only a hum remained.

e's in a prison now he'll never get out of, said reg calmly. I
wonder what they'll think when they find him, dressed in civilian
clothes and carrying a heat gun. They'll clap him into a photo-cell and
keep him there until they investigate. When they find out who he is, he
won't get out--he has enough unfinished prison sentences to last a
century or two.

For ete was on one of the ulcan Fleet ships, the hell-ships of the
prison fleet. There were confined only the most vicious and the most
depraved of the Solar System's criminals. e would be forced to work
under the flaming whip-lashes of a Sun that hurled such intense
radiations that mere spacesuits were no protection at all. The workers
on the ulcan Fleet ships wore suits that were in reality photo-cells
which converted the deadly radiations into electric power. For electric
power can be disposed of where heat cannot.

uailing inside his force shell, Scorio saw his men go, one by one. Saw
them lifted and whisked away, out through the depths of space by the
magic touch upon the keyboards. With terror-widened eyes he watched
uss set up the equations, saw him trip the activating lever, saw the
men disappear, listened to the thunderous rumbling of the mighty
engines.

hizzy went to the Outpost, the harsh prison on Neptune's satellite. eg
went to Titan, clear across the Solar System, where men in the infamous
penal colony labored in the frigid wastes of that moon of Saturn. Ma
went to esta, the asteroid prison, which long had been the target of
reformers, who claimed that on it  per cent of the prisoners died of
boredom and fear.

Ma was gone and only Scorio remained.

Stutsman's the one who got us into this, wailed the gangster. e's
the man you want to get. Not me. Not the boys. Stutsman.

I promise you, said reg, that we'll take care of Stutsman.

And hambers, too, chattered Scorio. But you can't touch hambers.
ou wouldn't dare.

We're not worrying about hambers, reg told him. We're not worrying
about anyone. ou're the one who had better start doing some.

Scorio cringed.

et me tell you about a place on enus, said reg. It's in the center
of a big swamp that stretches for hundreds of miles in every direction.
It's a sort of mountain rising out of the swamp. And the swamp is filled
with beasts and reptiles of every kind. avenous things, lusting for
blood. But they don't climb the mountain. A man, if he stayed on the
mountain, would be safe. There's food there. oots and berries and
fruits and even small animals one could kill. A man might go hungry for
a while, but soon he'd find the things to eat.

But he'd be alone. No one ever goes near that mountain. I am the only
man who ever set foot on it. erhaps no one ever will again. At night
you hear the screaming and the crying of the things down in swamp, but
you mustn't pay any attention to them.

                                   

Scorio's eyes widened, staring. ou won't send me there!

ou'll find my campfires, reg told him, if the rain hasn't washed
them away. It rains a lot. So much and so drearily that you'll want to
leave that mountain and walk down into the swamp, of your own free will,
and let the monsters finish you.

Scorio sat dully. e did not move. orror glazed his eyes.

reg signed to uss. uss, pipe clenched between his teeth, reached out
his fingers for the keys. The engines droned.

Manning walked slowly to a television control, sat down in the chair
and flipped over a lever. A face stared out of the screen. It was
strangely filled with anger and a sort of half-fear.

ou watched it, didn't you, Stutsman? reg asked.

Stutsman nodded. I watched. ou can't get away with it, Manning. ou
can't take the law into your own hands that way.

ou and hambers have been taking the law into your hands for years,
said reg. All I did tonight was clear the arth of some vermin. very
one of those men was guilty of murder ... and worse.

What did you gain by it? asked Stutsman.

reg gave a bitter laugh. I convinced you, Stutsman, he said, that it
isn't so easy to kill me. I think it'll be some time before you try
again. Better luck net time.

e flipped the switch and turned about in the chair.

uss erked his thumb at the skylight. Might as well finish the ship
now.

reg nodded.

An instant later there was a fierce, intolerably blue-white light that
lit the mountains for many miles. For ust an instant it flared,
eploding into millions of brilliant, harmless sparks that died into
darkness before they touched the ground. The gangster ship was destroyed
beyond all tracing, disintegrated. The metal and quartz of which it was
made were simply gone.

uss brought his glance back from the skylight, looked at his friend.
Stutsman will do everything he can to wipe us out. By tomorrow morning
the Interplanetary machine will be rolling. With only one purpose--to
crush us.

That's right, reg agreed, but we're ready for them now. Our ship
left the Belgium factories several hours ago. The omet towed it out
in space and it's waiting for us now. In a few hours the omet will be
here to pick us up.

War in space, said uss, musingly. That's what it will be.

hambers and his gang won't fight according to any rules. There'll be
no holds barred, no more feeble attempts like the one they tried
tonight. From now on we need a base that simply can't be located.

The ship, said uss.




AT FOTN


The Invincible hung in space, an empty, airless hull, the largest
thing afloat.

hartered freighters, leaving their ports from distant parts of the
arth, had converged upon her hours before, had unloaded crated
apparatus, storing it in the yawning hull. Then they had departed.

Now the sturdy little space-yacht, omet, was towing the great ship
out into space, , miles beyond the orbit of the Moon. Slowly the
hull was being taken farther and farther away from possible discovery.

Work on the installation of the apparatus had started almost as soon as
the omet had first tugged at the ponderous mass. eaving only a
skeleton crew in charge of the omet, the rest of the selected crew
had begun the assembly of the mighty machines which would transform the
Invincible into a thing of unimaginable power and speed.

The doors were closed and sealed and the air, already stored in the
ship's tanks, was released. The slight acceleration of the omet's
towing served to create artificial weight for easier work, but not
enough to handicap the shifting of the heavier pieces of apparatus. An
electric cable was run back from the little yacht and the Invincible
took her first breath of life.

The work advanced rapidly, for every man was more than a mere engineer
or spacebuster. They were a selected crew, the men who had helped to
make the name of regory Manning famous throughout the Solar System.

First the engines were installed, then the two groups of five massive
power plants and the single smaller engine as an auiliary supply plant
for the light, heat, air.

The accumulators of the omet were drained in a single tremendous
surge and the auiliary generator started. It in turn awoke to life the
other power plants, to leave them sleeping, idling, but ready for
instant use to develop power such as man never before had dreamed of
holding and molding to his will.

Then, with the gigantic tools these engines supplied ... tools of pure
force and strange space fields ... the work was rapidly completed. The
power boards were set in place, welded in position by a sudden furious
blast of white hot metal and as equally sudden freezing, to be followed
by careful heating and recooling till the beryl-steel reached its
maimum strength. Over the hull swarmed spacesuited men, using that
strange new power, heat-treating the stubborn metal in a manner never
before possible.

The generators were charging the atoms of the ship's beryl-steel hide
with the same hazy force that had trapped and held the gangster ship in
a mighty vise. Thus charged, no material thing could penetrate them. The
greatest meteor would be crushed to drifting dust without so much as
scarring that wall of mighty force ... meteors traveling with a speed
and penetrative power that no gun-hurled proectile could ever hope to
attain.

iding under her own power, driven by the concentration of gravitational
lines, impregnable to all known forces, containing within her hull the
secrets of many strange devices, the Invincible wheeled in space.

                                   

ussell age lounged in a chair before the control manual of the
tele-transport machine. e puffed placidly at his pipe and looked out
through the great sweep of the vision panel. Out there was the black of
space and the glint of stars, the soft glow of distant upiter.

reg Manning was hunched over the navigation controls, sharp eyes
watching the panorama of space.

uss looked at him and grinned. On reg's face there was a smile, but
about his eyes were lines of alert watchfulness and thought. reg
Manning was in his proper role at the controls of a ship such as the
Invincible, a man who never stepped backward from danger, whose spirit
hungered for the vast stretches of void that lay between the worlds.

uss leaned back, blowing smoke toward the high-arched control room
ceiling.

They had burned their bridges behind them. The laboratory back in the
mountains was destroyed. ocked against any possible attack by a sphere
of force until the tele-transport had lifted from it certain items of
equipment, it had been melted into a mass of molten metal that formed a
pool upon the mountain top, that ran in gushing, fiery ribbons down the
mountain side, flowing in gleaming curtains over precipices. It would
have been easier to have merely disintegrated in one bursting flash of
energy, but that would have torn apart the entire mountain range,
overwhelmed and toppled cities hundreds of miles away, dealt arth a
staggering blow.

A skeleton crew had taken the omet back to arth and landed it on
reg's estate. Once again the tele-transport had reached out, wrapped
its fingers around the men who stepped from the little ship. In less
than the flash of a strobe light, they had been snatched back to the
Invincible, through a million miles of space, through the very walls
of the ship itself. One second they had been on arth, the net second
they were in the control room of the Invincible, grinning, saluting
reg Manning, trotting back to their quarters in the engine rooms.

                                   

uss stared out at space, puffed at his pipe, considering.

A thousand years ago men had held what they called tournaments. Armored
knights rode out into the ousting grounds and broke their lances to
prove which was the better man. Today there was to be another
tournament. This ship was to be their charger, and the gauntlet had been
flung to Spencer hambers and Interplanetary ower. And all of space was
to be the ousting grounds.

This was war. War without trappings, without fanfare, but bitter war
upon which depended the future of the Solar System. A war to break the
grip of steel that Interplanetary accumulators had gained upon the
planets, to shatter the grim dream of empire held by one man, a war for
the right to give to the people of the worlds a source of power that
would forever unshackle them.

Back in those days, a thousand years ago, men had built a system of
government that historians called the feudal system. By this system
certain men were called lords or barons and other titles. They held the
power of life and death over the men under them.

This was what Spencer hambers was trying to do with the Solar
System ... what he would do if someone did not stop him.

                                   

uss bit viciously on his pipe-stem.

The arth, the Solar System, never could revert to that ancient way of
government. The proud people spawned on the arth, swarming outward to
the other planets, must never have to bow their heads as minions to an
overlord.

The thrum of power was beating in his brain, the droning, humming power
from the engine rooms that would blast, once and forever, the last
threat of dictatorship upon any world. The power that would free a
people, that would help them on and up and outward to the great destiny
that was theirs.

And this had come because, wondering, groping, curiously, he had sought
to heat a slender thread of imperm wire within Force Field , because
another man had listened and had made available his fortune to continue
the eperiments. Blind luck and human curiosity ... perhaps even the
madness of a human dream ... and from those things had come this great
ship, this mighty power, these many bulking pieces of equipment that
would perform wonders never guessed at less than a year ago.

reg Manning swiveled his chair. Well, uss, we're ready to begin.
et's get Wrail first.

uss nodded silently, his mind still half full of fleeting thought.
Absent-mindedly he knocked out his pipe and pocketed it, swung around to
the manual of the televisor. is fingers reached out and tapped a
pattern.

allisto appeared within the screen, leaped upward at them. Then the
surface of the frozen little world seemed to rotate swiftly and a dome
appeared.

The televisor dived through the dome, sped through the city, straight
for a penthouse apartment.

Ben Wrail sat slumped in a chair. A newspaper was crumpled at his feet.
In his lap lay a mangled dead cigar.

reg! yelled uss. reg, there's something wrong!

reg leaped forward, stared at the screen. uss heard his smothered cry
of rage.

In Wrail's forehead was a tiny, neatly drilled hole from which a single
drop of blood oozed.

Murdered! eclaimed uss.

es, murdered, said reg, and there was a sudden calmness in his
voice.

uss grasped the televisor control. anthoor's streets ran beneath them,
curiously silent and deserted. ere and there lay bodies. A few shop
windows were smashed. But the only living that stirred was a dog that
slunk across the street and into the shadows of an alley.

Swiftly the televisor swung along the streets. Straight into the screen
clanked a marching detail of government police, herding before them a
half dozen prisoners. The men had their hands bound behind their backs,
but they walked with heads held high.

evolution, gasped uss.

Not a revolution. A purge. Stutsman is clearing the city of all who
might be dangerous to him. This will be happening on every other planet
where hambers holds control.

erspiration ran down uss's forehead and dripped into his eyes as he
manipulated the controls.

Stutsman is striking first, said reg, calmly ... far too calmly.
e's consolidating his position, possibly on the pretense that plots
have been discovered.

A few buildings were bombed. A line of bodies were crumpled at the foot
of a steel wall, marking the spot where men had been lined up and mowed
down with one sweeping blast from a heater.

uss turned the television controls. et's see about enus and Mars.

The scenes in anthoor were duplicated in Sandebar on Mars, in New
hicago, the capital of enus. verywhere Stutsman had struck ...
everywhere the purge was wiping out in blood every person who might
revolt against the hambers-dictated governments. Throughout the Solar
System violence was on the march, iron-shod boots trampling the rights
of free men to tighten the grip of Interplanetary.

                                   

In the control room of the Invincible the two men stared at one
another.

There's one man we need, said reg. One man, if he's still alive, and
I think he is.

Who is that? asked uss.

ohn Moore Mallory, said reg.

Where is he?

I don't know. e was imprisoned in anthoor, but Stutsman transferred
him some place else. ossibly to one of the prison fleet.

If we had the records of the allisto prison, suggested uss, we
could find out.

If we had the records ...

We'll get them! uss said.

e swung back to the keyboard again.

A moment later the administration offices of the prison were on the
screen.

The two men searched the vision plate.

The records are most likely in that vault, said uss. And the vault
is locked.

Don't worry about the lock, snapped reg. ust bring the whole damn
thing here--vault and records and all.

uss nodded grimly. is thumb tripped the tele-transport control and
from the engine rooms came a drone of power. In anthoor rison, great
bands of force wrapped themselves around the vault, clutching it,
enfolding it within a sphere of power. Back in the Invincible the
engines screamed and the vault was ripped out of the solid steel wall as
easily as a man might rip a button from his shirt.




AT FIFTN


ohn Moore Mallory sat on the single metal chair within his cell and
pressed his face against the tiny vision port. For hours he had sat
there, staring out into the blackness of space.

There was bitterness in ohn Moore Mallory's soul, a terrible and futile
bitterness. So long as he had remained within the anthoor prison, there
had always been a chance of escape. But now, aboard the penal ship,
there was no hope. Nothing but the taunting reaches of space, the
mocking pinpoints of the stars, the hooting laughter of the engines.

Sometimes he had thought he would go mad. The everlasting routine, the
meaningless march of hours. The work period, the sleep period ... the
work period, the sleep period ... endless monotony, an eistence without
a purpose. Men buried alive in space.

ohn Moore Mallory, said a voice.

Mallory heard, but he did not stir. An awful thought crossed his mind.
Now he was hearing voices calling his name!

ohn Mallory, said the voice again.

Mallory slowly turned about and as he turned he started from his chair.

A man stood in the cell! A man he had never seen before, who had come
silently, for there had been no screech of opening door.

ou are ohn Moore Mallory, aren't you? asked the man.

es, I am Mallory. Who are you?

regory Manning.

regory Manning, said Mallory wonderingly. I've heard of you. ou're
the man who rescued the luto pedition. But why are you here? ow did
you get in?

I came to take you away with me, said reg. Back to allisto. Back to
any place you want to go.

Mallory flattened himself against the partition, his face white with
disbelief. But I'm in a prison ship. I'm not free to go and come as I
please.

reg chuckled. ou are free to go and come as you please from now on,
he said. ven prison ships can't hold you.

ou're mad, whispered Mallory. ither you're mad or I am. ou're a
dream. I'll wake up and find you gone.

Manning stood in silence, looking at the man. Mallory bore the marks of
prison on him. is eyes were haunted and his rugged face was pinched and
thin.

isten closely, Mallory, said reg softly. ou aren't going mad and
I'm not mad. ou aren't seeing things. ou aren't hearing things. ou're
actually talking to me.

                                   

There was no change in the other's face.

Mallory, reg went on, I have what you've always needed--means of
generating almost unlimited energy at almost no cost, the secret of the
energy of matter. A secret that will smash Interplanetary, that will
free the Solar System from Spencer hambers. But I can't make that
secret available to the people until hambers is crushed, until I'm sure
that he can't take it from me. And to do that I need your help.

Mallory's face lost its epression of bewilderment, suddenly lighted
with realization. But his voice was harsh and bitter.

ou came too late. I can't help you. emember, I'm in a prison ship
from which no one can escape. ou have to do what you can ... you must
do what you can. But I can't be with you.

Manning strode forward. ou don't get the idea at all. I said I'd get
you out of here and I'm going to. I could pick up this ship and put it
wherever I wanted. But I don't want to. I ust want you.

Mallory stared at him.

ust don't be startled, said reg. Something will happen soon. et
ready for it.

Feet drummed on the metal corridor outside.

ey, you, pipe down! yelled the voice of the guard. ou know there's
no talking allowed now. o to sleep.

That's the guard, Mallory whispered fiercely. They'll stop us.

reg grinned viciously. No, they won't.

                                   

The guard came into view through the grilled door.

So it's you, Mallory ... he began, stopping in amazement. ey, you!
he shouted at reg. Who are you? ow did you get in that cell?

reg flipped a hand in greeting. leasant evening, isn't it?

The guard grabbed for the door, but he did not reach the bars. Some
force stopped him si inches away. It could not be seen, could not be
felt, but his straining against it accomplished nothing.

Mallory and I are leaving, reg told the guard. We don't like it
here. Too stuffy.

The guard lifted a whistle and blew a blast. Feet pounded outside. A
prisoner yelled from one of the cells. Another catcalled. Instantly the
ship was in an uproar. The convicts took up the yammering, shaking the
bars on their doors.

et's get started, reg said to Mallory. old tight.

Blackness engulfed Mallory. e felt a peculiar twisting wrench. And then
he was standing in the control room of a ship and regory Manning and
another man were smiling at him. White light poured down from a cluster
of globes. Somewhere in the ship engines purred with the hum of power.
The air was fresh and pure, making him realize how foul and stale the
air of the prison ship had been.

reg held out his hand. Welcome to our ship.

Mallory gripped his hand, blinking in the light. Where am I?

ou are on the Invincible, five million miles off allisto.

But were you here all the time? asked Mallory. Were you in my cell
back there or weren't you?

I was really in your cell, reg assured him. I could have ust thrown
my image there, but I went there personally to get you. uss age, here,
sent me out. When I gave him the signal, he brought both of us back.

I'm glad you're with us, uss said. erhaps you'd like a cup of
coffee, something to eat.

Mallory stammered. Why, I really would. e laughed. ations weren't
too good in the prison ship.

They sat down while uss rang the galley for coffee and sandwiches.

risply, reg informed Mallory of the situation.

We want to start manufacturing these engines as soon as possible, he
eplained, but I haven't even dared to patent them. hambers would
simply buy out the officials if I tried it on arth, delay the patent
for a few days and then send through papers copied from ours. ou know
what he'd do with it if he got the patent rights. e'd scrap it and the
old accumulator business would go on as always. If I tried it on any
other world, with any other government, he'd see that laws were passed
to block us. e'd probably instruct the courts to rule against the
manufacture of the engines on the grounds that they were dangerous.

Mallory's face was grave. There's only one answer, he said. With the
situation on the worlds, with this purge you told me about, there's only
one thing to do. We have to act at once. very minute we wait gives
Stutsman ust that much longer to tighten his hold.

And that answer? asked uss.

evolution, said Mallory. Simultaneous revolution in the ovian
confederacy, on Mars and enus. Once free, the planets will stay free
with your material energy engines. Spencer hambers and his idea of
Solar System domination will be too late.

                                   

reg's forehead was wrinkled in thought, his facial muscles tensed.

First thing to do, he said, is to contact all the men we can find ...
men we can rely on to help us carry out our plans. We'll need more
televisor machines, more teleport machines, some for use on Mars and
enus, others for the ovian moons. We will have to bring the men here
to learn to operate them. It'll take a few days. We'll get some men to
work on new machines right away.

e started to rise from his chair, but at that moment the coffee and
sandwiches arrived.

reg grinned. We may as well eat first.

Mallory looked grateful and tried to keep from wolfing the food. The
others pretended not to notice.

                                   

rim hours followed, an unrelenting search over two planets and four
moons for men whom Mallory considered loyal to his cause--men willing to
risk their lives to throw off the yoke of Interplanetary.

They were hard to find. Many of them were dead, victims of the purge.
The others were in hiding and word of them was difficult to get.

But slowly, one by one, they were ferreted out, the plan eplained to
them, and then, by means of the tele-transport, they were brought to the
Invincible.

our after hour men worked, stripped to their waists, in the glaring
inferno of terrible force fields, fashioning new television units. As
fast as the sets were constructed, they were placed in operation.

The work went faster than could be epected, yet it was maddeningly
slow.

For with the passing of each hour, Stutsman clamped tighter his iron
grip on the planets. oncentration camps were filled to overflowing.
Buildings were bombed and burned. Murders and eecutions were becoming
too common to be news.

Then suddenly there was a new development.

reg, raven has found something! uss cried. I can't get him!

Supervising the installation of a new televisor set, reg spun around.
What's that?

raven! I can't reach him. e's blocking me out!

reg helped, but the apparatus was unable to enter the Interplanetary
building in New ork. ertain other portions of the city adacent to the
building also were blanketed out. In all the Solar System, the
Interplanetary building was the only place they could not enter, ecept
the Sun itself.

raven had developed a field from which their field shied off. The
televisor seemed to roll off it like a drop of mercury. That definitely
ended all spying on raven and hambers.

uss mopped his brow, sucked at his dead pipe.

ight penetrates it, he said. Matter penetrates it, electricity, all
ordinary forces. But this field won't. It's ... well, whatever raven
has is similarly dissimilar. The same thing of opposite nature. It
repels our field, but doesn't affect anything else. That means he has
analyzed our fields. We have Wilson to thank for this.

reg nodded gravely. There's ust one thing to be thankful for, he
declared. e probably isn't any nearer our energy than he was before.
But now we can't watch him. And that field of his shows that he has
tremendous power of some sort.

We can't watch him, but we can follow him, corrected uss. e can't
shake us. None of them can. The mechanical shadow will take care of
that. I have one for raven with a bit of 'bait' off his spectacles and
he'll keep those spectacles, never fear. e's blind as a bat without
them. And we can track hambers with his ring.

That's right, agreed reg, but we've got to speed up. raven is
getting under way now. If he does this, he can do something else.
Something that will really hurt us. The man's clever ... too damn
clever.




AT SITN


A miracle came to pass in anthoor when a man for whom all hope had been
abandoned suddenly appeared within the city's streets. But he appeared
to be something not quite earthly, for he did not have the solidity of a
man. e was pale, like a wraith from out of space, and one could see
straight through him, yet he still had all the old mannerisms and
tricks.

In frightened, awe-stricken whispers the word was spread ... the spirit
of ohn Moore Mallory had come back to the city once again. e bulked
four times the height of a normal man and there was that singular
ghostliness about him. From where he had come, or how, or why, no one
seemed to know.

But when he reached the steps of the federation's administration
building and walked straight through a line of troopers that suddenly
massed to bar his way, and when he turned on those steps and spoke to
the people who had gathered, there was none to doubt that at last a sign
had come. The sign that now, if ever, was the time to avenge the purge.
Now the time to take vengeance for the blood that flowed in gutters, for
the throaty chortling of the flame guns that had snuffed out lives
against a broad steel wall.

Standing on the steps, shadowy but plainly visible, ohn Moore Mallory
talked to the people in the square below, and his voice was the voice
they remembered. They saw him toss his black mane of hair, they saw his
clenched fist raised in terrible anger, they heard the boom of the words
he spoke.

ike a shrilling alarm the words spread through the city, reverberating
from the dome, seeking out those who were in hiding. From every corner
of the city, from its deepest cellars and its darkest alleys, poured out
a mass of humanity that surrounded the capitol and blackened the square
and the converging streets with a mob that shrieked its hatred, bellowed
its anger.

ower! thundered the mighty shadow on the steps. ower to burn! ower
to give away. ower to heat the dome, to work your mines, to drive your
spaceships!

ower! answered the voice of the crowd. ower! It sounded like a
battle cry.

No more accumulators, roared the towering image. Never again need you
rely on Spencer hambers for your power. allisto is yours. anthoor is
yours.

The black crowd surged forward, reached the steps and started to climb,
wild cheers in their throat, the madness of victory in their eyes. p
the steps came men with nothing but bare hands, screaming women, eering
children.

Officers snapped orders at the troops that lined the steps, but the
troopers, staring into the awful, raging maw of that oncoming crowd,
dropped their guns and fled, back into the capitol building, with the
mob behind them, shrilling blood lust and long-awaited vengeance.

                                   

Out of the red and yellow wilderness of the deserts, a man came to
Sandebar on Mars. e had long been thought dead. The minions of the
government had announced that he was dead. But he had been in hiding for
si years.

is beard was long and gray, his eyes were curtained by hardship, his
white hair hung about his shoulders and he was clothed in the tattered
leather trappings of the spaceways.

But men remembered him.

Tom Brown had lead the last revolt against the Martian government, an
ill-starred revolt that ended almost before it started when the
troopers turned loose the heavy heaters and swept the streets with
washing waves of flame.

When he climbed to the base of a statue in Techor ark to address the
crowd that gathered, the police shouted for him to come down and he
disregarded them. They climbed the statue to reach him and their hands
went through him.

Tom Brown stood before the people, in plain view, and spoke, but he
wasn't there!

Other things happened in Sandebar that day. A voice spoke out of thin
air, a voice that told the people the reign of Interplanetary was over.
It told of a mighty new source of power. ower that would cost almost
nothing. ower that would make the accumulators unnecessary ... would
make them out of date. A voice that said the people need no longer
submit to the yoke of Spencer hambers' government in order to obtain
the power they needed.

There was no one there ... no one visible at all. And yet that voice
went on and on. A great crowd gathered, listening, cheering. The police
tried to break it up and failed. The troops were ordered out and the
people fought them until the voice told them to disband peaceably and go
to their homes.

Throughout Mars it was the same.

In a dozen places in Sandebar the voice spoke. It spoke in a dozen
places, out of empty air, in Malacon and Aleon and Adebron.

Tom Brown, vanishing into the air after his speech was done, reappeared
a few minutes later in Adebron and there the police, warned of what had
happened in Sandebar, opened fire upon him when he stood on a park bench
to address the people. But the flames passed through and did not touch
him. Tom Brown, his long white beard covering his chest, his mad eyes
flashing, stood in the fiery blast that bellowed from the muzzles of the
flame rifles and calmly talked.

                                   

The chief of police at New hicago, enus, called the police
commissioner. There's a guy out here in the park, ust across the
street. e's preaching treason. e's telling the people to overthrow the
government.

In the ground glass the police commissioner's face grew purple.

Arrest him, he ordered the chief. lap him in the ug. Do you have to
call me up every time one of those fiery-eyed boys climbs a soap bo?
un him in.

I can't, said the chief.

The police commissioner seemed ready to eplode. ou can't? Why the
hell not?

Well, you know that hill in the center of the park? Memorial ill?

What has a hill got to do with it? the commissioner roared.

e's sitting on top of that hill. e's a thousand feet tall. is head
is way up in the sky and his voice is like thunder. ow can you arrest
anybody like that?

                                   

verywhere in the System, revolt was flaming. New marching songs rolled
out between the worlds, wild marching songs that had the note of anger
in them. Weapons were brought out of hiding and polished. New standards
were raised in an ever-rising tide against oppression.

Freedom was on the march again. The right of a man to rule himself the
way he chose to rule. A new declaration of independence. A Solar Magna
arta.

There were new leaders, led by the old leaders. ed by spirits that
marched across the sky. ed by voices that spoke out of the air. ed by
signs and symbols and a new-born courage and a great and a deep
conviction that right in the end would triumph.

                                   

Spencer hambers glared at udwig Stutsman. This is one time you went
too far.

If you'd given me a free hand before, this wouldn't have been
necessary, Stutsman said. But you were soft. ou made me go easy when
I should have ground them down. ou left the way open for all sorts of
plots and schemes and leaders to develop.

The two men faced one another, one the smooth, tawny lion, the other the
snarling wolf.

ou've built up hatred, Stutsman, hambers said. ou are the most
hated man in the Solar System. And because of you, they hate me. That
wasn't my idea. I needed you because I needed an iron fist, but I needed
it to use udiciously. And you have been ruthless. ou've used force
when conciliation was necessary.

Stutsman sneered openly. Still that old dream of a benevolent
dictatorship. Still figuring yourself a little bronze god to be set up
in every household. A dictatorship can't be run that way. ou have to
let them know you're boss.

hambers was calm again. Argument won't do us any good now. The damage
is done. evolt is flaming through all the worlds. We have to do
something.

e looked at raven, who was slouched in a chair beside the desk across
which he and Stutsman faced each other.

an you help us, doctor? he asked.

raven shrugged. erhaps, he said acidly. If I could only be left to
my work undisturbed, instead of being dragged into these stupid
conferences, I might be able to do something.

ou already have, haven't you? asked hambers.

ery little. I've been able to blank out the televisor that Manning and
age are using, but that is all.

Do you have any idea where Manning and age are?

ow could I know? raven asked. Somewhere in space.

They're at the bottom of this, snarled Stutsman. Their damned tricks
and propaganda.

We know they're at the bottom of it, said raven. That's no news to
us. If it weren't for them, we wouldn't have this trouble now, despite
your bungling. But that doesn't help us any. With this new discovery of
mine I have shielded this building from their observation. They can't
spy on us any more. But that's as far as I've got.

They televised the secret meeting of the emergency council when it met
in Satellite ity on anymede the other day, said hambers. The whole
ovian confederacy watched and listened to that meeting, heard our
secret war plans, for fully ten minutes before the trick was discovered.
ouldn't we use your shield to prevent such a situation again?

Better still, suggested Stutsman, let's shield the whole satellite.
Without Manning's ghostly leaders, this revolt would collapse of its own
weight.

raven shook his head. It takes fifty tons of accumulators to build up
that field, and a ton of fuel a day to maintain it. ust for this
building alone. It would be impossible to shield a whole planet, an
entire moon.

                                   

Any progress on your collector field? asked hambers.

Some, raven admitted. I'll know in a day or two.

That would give us something with which to fight Manning and age,
wouldn't it?

es, agreed raven. It would be something to fight them with. If I
can develop that collector field, we would be able to utilize every
radiation in space, from the heat wave down through the cosmics. Within
the Solar System, our power would be absolutely limitless. our
accumulators depend for their power storage upon ust one radiation ...
heat. But with this idea I have you'd use all types of radiations.

ou say you could even put the cosmics to work? asked hambers.

raven nodded. If I can do anything at all with the field, I can.

ow? demanded Stutsman.

By breaking them up, you fool. Smash the short, high-powered waves into
a lot of longer, lower-powered waves. raven swung back to face
hambers. But don't count on it, he warned. I haven't done it yet.

ou have to do it, hambers insisted.

raven rose from his chair, his blue eyes blazing angrily behind the
heavy lenses. ow often must I tell you that you cannot hurry
scientific investigation? ou have to try and try ... follow one tiny
clue to another tiny clue. ou have to be patient. ou have to hope. But
you cannot force the work.

e strode from the room, slammed the door behind him.

hambers turned slowly in his chair to face Stutsman. is gray eyes
bored into the wolfish face.

And now, he suggested, suppose you tell me ust why you did it.

Stutsman's lips curled. I suppose you would rather I had allowed those
troublemakers to go ahead, consolidate their plans. There was only one
thing to do--root them out, liquidate them. I did it.

ou chose a poor time, said hambers softly. ou would have to do
something like this, ust at the time when Manning is lurking around the
Solar System somewhere, carrying enough power to wipe us off the face of
the arth if he wanted to.

That's why I did it, protested Stutsman. I knew Manning was around. I
was afraid he'd start something, so I beat him to it. I thought it would
throw a scare into the people, make them afraid to follow Manning when
he acted.

                                   

ou have a low opinion of the human race, don't you? hambers said.
ou think you can beat them into a mire of helplessness and fear.

hambers rose from his chair, pounded his desk for emphasis.

But you can't do it, Stutsman. Men have tried it before you, from the
very dawn of history. ou can destroy their homes and kill their
children. ou can burn them at the stake or in the electric chair, hang
them or space-walk them or herd them into gas chambers. ou can drive
them like cattle into concentration camps, you can keep the torture
racks bloody, but you can't break them.

Because the people always survive. Their courage is greater than the
courage of any one man or group of men. They always reach the man who
has oppressed them, they always tear him down from the place he sits,
and they do not deal gently with him when they do. In the end the
people always win.

hambers reached across the desk and caught Stutsman by the slack of the
shirt. A twist of his hand tightened the fabric around Stutsman's neck.
The financier thrust his face close to the wolfish scowl. That is what
is going to happen to you and me. We'll go down in history as ust a
couple of damn fools who tried to rule and couldn't make the grade.
Thanks to you and your damned stupidity. ou and your blood purges!

atches of anger burned on Stutsman's cheeks. is eyes glittered and his
lips were white. But his whisper was bitter mockery. Maybe we should
have coddled and humored them. Made them ust so awful happy that big
bad old Interplanetary had them. So they could have set up little bronze
images of you in their homes. So you could have been sort of a solar
god!

I still think it would have been the better way. hambers flung
Stutsman from him with a straight-armed push. The man reeled and
staggered across the carpeted floor. et out of my sight!

Stutsman straightened his shirt, turned and left.

hambers slumped into his chair, his hands grasping the arms on either
side of his great body, his eyes staring out through the window from
which flooded the last rays of the afternoon Sun.

                                   

Drums pounded in his brain ... the drums of rebellion out in space, of
rebellion on those other worlds ... drums that were drowning out and
shattering forever the dream that he had woven. e had wanted economic
dictatorship ... not the cold, passionless, terrible dictatorship that
Stutsman typified ... but one that would bring peace and prosperity and
happiness to the Solar System.

e closed his eyes and thought. Snatches of ambition, snatches of
hopes ... but it was useless to think, for the drums and the imagined
shouting drowned out his thoughts.

Mankind didn't give a damn for good business administration, nor a hoot
for prosperity or peace or happiness. iberty and the right to rule, the
right to go risk one's neck ... to climb a mountain or cross a desert or
eplore a swamp, the right to aim one's sights at distant stars, to
fling a taunting challenge into the teeth of space, to probe with clumsy
fingers and force nature to lay bare her secrets ... that was what
mankind wanted. That was what those men out on Mars and enus and in
the ovian worlds were fighting for. Not against Spencer hambers or
udwig Stutsman or Interplanetary ower, but for the thing that drove
man on and made of him a flame that others might follow. Fighting for a
heritage that was first epressed when the first man growled at the
entrance to his cave and dared the world to take it from him.

Spencer hambers closed his eyes and rocked back and forth in the
tilting office chair.

It had been a good fight, a hard fight. e had had a lot of fun out of
it. But he was licked, after all these years. e had held the biggest
dream of any man who ever lived. Aleander and Napoleon, itler, Stalin
and those other fellows had been pikers alongside of Spencer hambers.
They had only aimed at arthly conquest while he had reached out to grab
at all the worlds. But by heaven, he'd almost made it!

A door grated open.

hambers! said a voice.

is feet hit the floor with a thud and he sat stiff and staring at the
figure in the door.

It was raven and the man was ecited. is glasses were slid far down on
his nose, his hair was standing on end, his tie was all awry.

I have it! raven whooped. I have it at last!

ope clutched at hambers, but he was almost afraid to speak.

ave what? he whispered tensely.

The collector field! It was under my nose all the time, but I didn't
see it!

hambers was out of his chair and striding across the room. A tumult
buzzed within his skull.

icked? ell, he hadn't even started! e'd win yet. e'd teach the
people to revolt! e'd run Manning and age out to the end of space and
push them through!




AT SNTN


It was a weird revolution. There were few battles, little blood shed.
There seemed to be no secret plots. There were no skulking leaders, no
passwords, nothing that in former years had marked rebellion against
tyranny.

It was a revolution carried out with utter boldness. Secret police were
helpless, for it was not a secret revolution. The regular police and the
troopers were helpless because the men they wanted to arrest were
shadows that flitter here and there ... large and substantial shadows,
but impossible to seize and imprison.

very scheme that was hatched within the government circles was known
almost at once to the ghostly leaders who stalked the land. olice
detachments, armed with warrants for the arrests of men who had
participated in some action which would stamp them as active rebels,
found the suspects absent when they broke down the doors. Someone had
warned them. Troops, hurried to points where riots had broken out,
arrived to find peaceful scenes, but with evidence of recent battle. The
rioters had been warned, had made their getaway.

When the rebels struck it was always at the most opportune time, when
the government was off balance or off guard.

In the first day of the revolt, anthoor fell when the maddened
populace, urged on by the words of a shadowy ohn Moore Mallory, charged
the federation buildings. The government fled, leaving all records
behind, to Satellite ity on anymede.

In the first week three Martian cities fell, but Sandebar, the capital,
still held out. On enus, adium ity was taken by the rebels within
twenty-four hours after the first call to revolt had rung across the
worlds, but New hicago, the seat of government, still was in the
government's hands, facing a siege.

overnment propagandists spread the word that the material energy
engines were not safe. eports were broadcast that on at least two
occasions the engines had blown up, killing the men who operated them.

But this propaganda failed to gain credence, for in the cities that were
in the rebel hands, technicians were at work manufacturing and setting
up the material engines. Demonstrations were given. The people saw them,
saw what enormous power they developed.

                                   

uss age stared incredulously at the television screen. It seemed to be
shifting back and forth. One second it held the distorted view of
Satellite ity on anymede, and the net second the view of umbled, icy
desert somewhere outside the city.

ook here, reg, he said. Something's wrong.

reg Manning turned away from the calculator where he had been working
and stared at the screen.

ow long has it been acting that way? he asked.

ust started, said uss.

reg straightened and glanced down the row of television machines. Some
of them were dead, their switches closed, but on the screens of many of
the others was the same effect as on this machine. Their operators were
working frustratedly at the controls, trying to focus the image, bring
it into sharp relief.

an't seem to get a thing, sir, said one of the men. I was working on
the fueling station out on Io, and the screen ust went haywire.

Mine seems to be all right, said another man. I've had it on Sandebar
for the last couple of hours and there's nothing wrong.

A swift check revealed one fact. The machines, when trained on the
ovian worlds, refused to function. Anywhere else in space, however,
they worked perfectly.

uss stoked and lit his pipe, snapped off his machine and swung around
in the operator's chair.

Somebody's playing hell with us out around upiter, he stated calmly.

I've been epecting something like this, said reg. I have been
afraid of this ever since raven blanketed us out of the Interplanetary
building.

                                   

e really must have something this time, uss agreed. e's blanketing
out the entire ovian system. There's a space field of low intensity
surrounding all of upiter, enclosing all the moons. e keeps shifting
the intensity so that, even though we can force our way through his
field, the irregular variations make it impossible to line up anything.
It works, in principle, ust as effectively as if we couldn't get
through at all.

reg whistled soundlessly through suddenly bared teeth.

That takes power, he said, and I'm afraid raven has it. ower to
burn.

The collector field? asked uss.

reg nodded. A field that sucks in radiant energy. Free energy that he
ust reaches out and grabs. And it doesn't depend on the Sun alone. It
probably makes use of every type of radiation in all of space.

uss slumped in his chair, smoking, his forehead wrinkled in thought.

If that's what he's got, he finally declared, he's going to be hard
to crack. e can suck in any radiant vibration form, any space
vibration. e can shift them around, break them down and build them up.
e can discharge them, direct them. e's got a vibration plant that's
the handiest little war machine that ever eisted.

reg suddenly wheeled and walked to a wall cabinet. From it he took a
bo and, opening it, lifted out a tiny mechanism.

e chuckled deep in his throat. The mechanical shadow. The little
machine that always tells us where raven is--as long as he's wearing
his glasses.

e always wears them, said uss crisply. e's blind as a bat without
them.

reg set the machine down on the table. When we find raven, we'll find
the contraption that's blanketing upiter and its moons.

Dials spun and needles quivered. apidly uss otted down the readings
on a sheet of paper. At the calculator, he tapped keys, depressed the
activator. The machine hummed and snarled and chuckled.

uss glanced at the result imprinted on the paper roll.

raven is out near upiter, he announced. About , miles distant
from its surface, in a plane normal to the Sun's rays.

A spaceship, suggested reg.

uss nodded. That's the only answer.

The two men looked at one another.

That's something we can get hold of, said reg.

e walked to the ship controls and lowered himself into the pilot's
chair. A hand came out and hauled back a lever.

The Invincible moved.

From the engine rooms came the whine of the gigantic power plant as it
built up and maintained the gravity concentration center suddenly
created in front of the ship.

uss, standing beside reg at the control panel, looked out into space
and marveled. They were flashing through space, their speed building up
at a breath-taking rate, yet they had no real propulsion power. The
discovery of the gravity concentrator had outdated such a method of
driving a spaceship. Instead, they were falling, hurtling downward into
the yawning maw of an artificial gravity field. And such a method made
for speed, terrible speed.

upiter seemed to leap at them. It became a great crimson and yellow
ball that filled almost half the vision plate.

                                   

The Invincible's speed was slacking off, slower and slower, until it
barely crawled in comparison to its former speed.

Slowly they circled upiter's great girth, staring out of the vision
port for a sight of raven's ship. They were nearing the position the
little mechanical shadow had indicated.

There it is, said uss suddenly, almost breathlessly.

Far out in space, tiny, almost like a dust mote against the great bulk
of the monster planet, rode a tiny light. Slowly the Invincible
crawled inward. The mote of light became a gleaming silver ship, a
mighty ship--one that was fully as large as the Invincible!

That's it all right, said reg. They're lying behind a log out here
raising hell with our television apparatus. Maybe we better tickle them
a little bit and see what they have.

ising from the control board, he went to another control panel. uss
remained standing in front of the vision plate, staring down at the
ship out in space.

Behind him came a shrill howl from the power plant. The Invincible
staggered slightly. A beam of deep indigo lashed across space, a finger
suddenly abbing at the other ship.

Space was suddenly colored, for thousands of miles, as the beam struck
raven's ship and seemed to eplode in a blast of dazzling indigo light.
The ship reeled under the impact of the blow, reeled and weaved in space
as the beam struck it and delivered to it the mighty power of the
screaming engines back in the engine room.

What happened? reg screamed above the roar.

uss shrugged his shoulders. ou arred him a little. ushed him
through space for several hundred miles. Made him know something had hit
him, but it didn't seem to do any damage.

That was pure cosmic I gave him! Five billion horsepower--and it ust
staggered him!

e's got a space lens that absorbs the energy, said uss. The lens
concentrates it and pours it into a receiving chamber, probably a huge
photo-cell. Nobody yet has burned out one of those things on a closed
circuit.

reg wrinkled his brow, perpleed. What he must have is a special field
of some sort that lowers the wave-length and the intensity. e's getting
natural cosmics all the time and taking care of them.

That wouldn't be much of a trick, uss pointed out. But when he takes
care of cosmics backed by five billion horsepower ... that's something
else!

reg grinned wickedly. I'm going to hand him a long heat radiation. If
his field shortens that any, he'll have radio beam and that will blow
photo-cells all to hell.

e stabbed viciously at the keys on the board and once again the shrill
howl of the engines came from the rear of the ship. A lance of red
splashed out across space and touched the other ship. Again space was
lit, this time with a crimson glow.

                                   

uss shook his head. Nothing doing.

reg sat down and looked at uss. Funny thing about this. They ust sat
there and let us throw two charges at them, took everything we gave them
and never tried to hand it back.

Maybe they haven't anything to hand us, uss suggested hopefully.

They must have. raven wouldn't take to space with ust a purely
defensive weapon. e knew we'd find him and he'd have a fight on his
hands.

uss found his pipe was dead. Snapping his lighter, he applied flame to
the blackened tobacco. Walking slowly to the wall cabinet, he lifted two
other boes out, set them on the table and took from them two other
mechanical shadows. e turned them on and leaned close, watching the
spinning dials, the quivering needles.

reg, he whispered, hambers and Stutsman are there in that ship with
raven! ook, their shadows register identical with the one that spotted
raven.

I suspected as much, reg replied. We got the whole pack cornered out
here. If we can ust get rid of them, the whole war would be won in one
stroke.

uss lifted a stricken face from the row of tiny mechanisms. This is
our big chance. We may never get it again. The net hour could decide
who is going to win.

reg rose from the chair and stood before the control board. rimly he
punched a series of keys. The engines howled again. reg twisted a dial
and the howl rose into a shrill scream.

From the Invincible another beam lashed out ... another and another.
Space was speared with beam after beam hurtling from the great ship.

Swiftly the beams went through the range of radiation, through radio and
short radio, infra-red, visible light, ultra-violet, -ray, the gammas
and the cosmics--a terrific flood of billions of horsepower.

raven's ship buckled and careened under the lashing impacts of the
bombardment, but it seemed unhurt!

reg's face was bleaker than usual as he turned from the board to look
at uss.

We've used everything we have, he said, and he's stopped them all. We
can't touch him.

                                   

uss shivered. The control room suddenly seemed chilly with a
frightening kind of cold.

e's carrying photo-cells and several thousand tons of accumulator
stacks. Not much power left in them. e could pour a billion horsepower
into them for hours and still have room for more.

reg nodded wearily. All we've been doing is feeding him.

The engines were humming quietly now, singing the low song of power held
in leash.

But then they screamed like a buzz saw biting into an iron-hard stick of
white oak. Screamed in a single, frightful agony as they threw into the
protecting wall that enclosed the Invincible all the power they could
develop.

The air of the ship was instantaneously charged with a hazy, bluish
glow, and the sharp, stinging odor of ozone filled the ship.

                                   

Outside, an enormous burst of blue-white flame splashed and spattered
around the Invincible. iving lightning played in solid, snapping
sheets around the vision port and ran in trickling blazing fire across
the plates.

uss cried out and backed away, holding his arm before his eyes. It was
as if he had looked into a nova of energy eploding before his eyes.

In the instant the scream died and the splash of terrific fire had
vanished. Only a rapidly dying glow remained.

What was it? asked uss dazedly. What happened? Ten engines every one
of them capable of over five billion horsepower and every one of them
screaming!

raven, said reg grimly. e let us have everything he had. e simply
drained his accumulator stacks and threw it all into our face. But he's
done now. That was his only shot. e'll have to build up power now and
that will take a while. But we couldn't have taken much more.

Stalemate, said uss. We can't hurt him, he can't hurt us.

Not by a damn sight, declared reg. I still have a trick or two in
mind.

e tried them. From the Invincible a fifty-billion-horsepower bolt of
living light and fire sprang out as all ten engines thundered with an
insane voice that racked the ship.

Fireworks eploded in space when the bolt struck raven's ship. Screen
after screen eploded in glittering, flaming sparks, but the ship rode
the lashing charge, finally halted the thrust of power. The beam glowed
faintly, died out.

erspiration streamed down reg's face as he bent over a calculator and
constructed the formula for a magnetic field. e sent out a field of
such unimaginable intensity that it would have drawn any beryl-steel
within a mile of it into a hard, compact mass. ven the Invincible, a
hundred miles away, lurched under the strain. But raven's ship, after
the first wild erk, did not move. A curious soft glow spread out from
the ship, veered sharply and disappeared in the magnetic field.

reg swore softly. e's cutting it down as fast as I try to build it
up, he eplained, and I can't move it any nearer.

From raven's ship lashed out another thunderbolt and once again the
engines screamed in terrible unison as they poured power into the ship's
triple screen. The first screen stopped all material things. The second
stopped radiations by refracting them into the fourth dimension. The
third shield was akin to the anti-entropy field, which stopped all
matter ... and yet the ten engines bellowed like things insane as raven
struck with flaming bolts, utilizing the power he had absorbed from the
fifty billion horsepower reg had thrown at him.

There was anger in reg Manning's face ... a terrible anger. is fists
knotted and he shook them at the gleaming ship that lay far down near
upiter.

I've got one trick left, he shouted, almost as if he epected raven
to hear. ust one trick. Damn you, see if you can stop this one!

e set up the pattern on the board and punched the activating lever. The
ten engines thrummed with power. Then the howling died away.

Four times they screamed and four times they ebbed into a gentle hum.

et on the navigation controls! yelled reg. Be ready to give the
ship all you've got.

reg leaped for the control chair, grasped the acceleration lever.

Now, growled reg, look out, raven, we're coming at you!

reg, teeth gritted, slammed the acceleration over.

Suddenly all space wrenched horribly with a nauseating, terrible thud
that seemed to strain at the very anchors of the niverse.




AT ITN


upiter and the ovian worlds leaped suddenly backward, turned swiftly
green, then blue, and faded in an instant into violet. The Sun spun
crazily through space, retreating, dimming to a tiny ruby-tinted star.

The giant generators in the Invincible hummed louder now, continually
louder, a steel-throated roar that trembled through every plate, through
every girder, through every bit of metal in the ship.

The ship itself was plunging spaceward, streaking like a runaway star
for the depths of space beyond the Solar System. And behind it, caught
tight, gripped and held, raven's ship trailed at the end of a tractor
field that bound it to the space-rocketing Invincible.

The acceleration compensator, functioning perfectly, had taken up the
slack as the ship had plunged from a standing start into a speed that
neared the pace of light. But it had never been built to stand such
sudden, intense acceleration, and for an instant uss and reg seemed
to be crushed by a mighty weight that struck at them. The sensation
swiftly lifted as the compensator took up the load.

                                   

reg shook his head, flinging the trickling perspiration from his eyes.

I hope their compensator worked as well as ours, he said.

If it didn't, declared uss, we're towing a shipload of dead men.

uss glanced at the speed dial. They were almost touching the speed of
light. e hasn't cut down our speed yet.

We threw him off his balance. is drive depends largely on the mass of
some planet as a body to take up the reaction of his ship. upiter is
the ideal body for that ... but he's leaving upiter behind. e has to
do something soon or it'll be too late.

e's getting less energy, too, said uss. We're retreating from his
main sources of energy, the Sun and upiter. Almost the speed of light
and that would cut down his energy intake terrifically. e has to use
what he's got in his accumulators, and after that last blast at us, they
must be nearly drained.

As uss watched, the speed needle fell off slightly. uss held his
breath. It edged back slowly, creeping. The speed was being cut down.

raven is using whatever power he has, he said. They're alive back
there, all right. e's trying to catch hold of upiter and make its
gravity work for him.

The Invincible felt the strain of the other ship now. Felt it as
raven poured power into his drive, fighting to get free of the
invisible hawser that had trapped him, fighting against being dragged
into outer space at the tail-end of a mighty craft heading spaceward
with frightening speed.

irders groaned in the Invincible, the engines moaned and throbbed.
The speed needle fell back, creeping down the dial, slowly, unwillingly,
resisting any drop in speed. But raven was cutting it down. And as he
cut it, he was able to absorb more energy with his collector lens. But
he was fighting two things ... momentum and the steadily decreasing
gravitational pull of upiter and the Sun. The Sun's pull was dwindling
slowly, upiter's rapidly.

The needle still crept downward.

What's his point of equality to us? demanded reg. Will we make it?

uss shook his head. Won't know for hours. e'll be able to slow us
up ... maybe he'll even stop us or be able to erk free, although I
doubt that. But every minute takes him farther away from his main source
of power, the Solar System's radiation. e could collect power anywhere
in space, you know, but the best place to collect it is near large
radiant bodies.

uss continued to crouch over the dial, begrudging every backward
flicker of the needle.

This was the last play, the final hand. If they could drag raven and
his ship away from the Solar System, maroon him deep in space, far
removed from any source of radiation, they would win, for they could go
back and finish the work of smashing Interplanetary.

But if raven won--if he could halt their mad dash for space, if he
could shake free--they'd never have another chance. e would be studying
that field they had wrapped around him, be ready for it net time, might
even develop one like it and use it on the Invincible. If raven could
win his way back to the Sun, he would be stronger than they were, could
top them in power, shatter all their plans, and once again the worlds
would bow to Interplanetary and Spencer hambers.

uss watched the meter. The speed was little more than ten miles a
second now and dropping rapidly. e sat motionless, hunched, sucking at
his dead pipe, listening to the thrumming of the generators.

                                   

If we only had a margin, he groaned. If we ust had a few more
horsepower. ust a few. But we're wide open. very engine is developing
everything it can!

reg tapped him on the shoulder, gently. uss turned his head and looked
into the face of his friend, a face as bleak as ever, but with a hint of
smile in the corners of the eyes.

Why not let upiter help us? he asked. e could be a lot of help.

uss stared for a moment, uncomprehending. Then with a sob of gladness
he reached out a hand, shoved over a lever. Mirrors of anti-entropy
shifted, assumed different angles, and the Invincible sheered off.
They were no longer retreating directly from the Sun, but at an angle
quartering off across the Solar System.

reg grinned. We're falling behind upiter now. etting upiter run
away from us as he circles his orbit, following the Sun. Adds miles per
second to our velocity of retreat, even if it doesn't show on the dial.

The cosmic tug of war went on, grimly--two ships straining, fighting
each other, one seeking to escape, the other straining to snake the
second ship into the maw of open, hostile space.

The speed was down to five miles a second, then a fraction lower. The
needle was flickering now, impossible to decide whether it was dropping
or not. And in the engine rooms, ten great generators howled in their
attempt to make that needle move up the dial again.

uss lit his pipe, his eyes not leaving the dial. The needle was
creeping lower again. Down to three miles a second now.

e puffed clouds of smoke and considered. Saturn fortunately was ninety
degrees around in his orbit. On the present course, only Neptune
remained between them and free space. luto was far away, but even if it
had been, it really wouldn't count, for it was small and had little
attraction.

In a short while anymede and allisto would be moving around on the far
side of upiter and that might help. verything counted so much now.

The dial was down to two miles a second and there it hung. ung and
stayed. uss watched it with narrowed eyes. By this time raven
certainly would have given up much hope of help from upiter. If the big
planet couldn't have helped him before, it certainly couldn't now. In
another hour or two arth would transit the Sun and that would cut down
the radiant energy to some degree. But in the meantime raven was
loading his photo-cells and accumulators, was laying up a power reserve.
As a last desperate resort he would use that power, in a final attempt
to break away from the Invincible.

uss waited for that attempt. There was nothing that could be done about
it. The engines were developing every watt of power that could be urged
out of them. If raven had the power to break away, he would break
away ... that was all there would be to it.

An hour passed and the needle crept up a fraction of a point. uss was
still watching the dial, his mind foggy with concentration.

                                   

Suddenly the Invincible shuddered and seemed to totter in space, as if
something, some mighty force, had struck the ship a terrific blow. The
needle swung swiftly backward, reached one mile a second, dipped to half
a mile.

uss sat bolt upright, holding his breath, his teeth clenched with death
grip upon the pipe-stem.

raven had blasted with everything he had! e had used every last
trickle of power in the accumulators ... all the power he had been
storing up.

uss leaped from the chair and raced to the periscopic mirror.
Stooping, he stared into it. Far back in space, like a silver bauble,
swung raven's ship. It swung back and forth in space, like a mighty,
cosmic pendulum. Breathlessly he watched. The ship was still in the grip
of the space field!

reg, he shouted, we've got him!

e raced back to the control panel, snapped a glance at the speed dial.
The needle was rising rapidly now, a full mile a second. Within another
fifteen minutes, it had climbed to a mile and a half. The Invincible
was starting to go places!

The engines still howled, straining, shrieking, roaring their defiance.

In an hour the needle indicated the speed of four miles a second. Two
hours later it was ten and rising visibly as upiter fell far behind and
the Sun became little more than a glowing cinder.

uss swung the controls to provide side acceleration and the two ships
swung far to the rear of Neptune. They would pass that massive planet at
the safe distance of a full hundred million miles.

e won't even make a pass at it, said reg. e knows he's licked.

robably trying to store some more power, suggested uss.

Sweet chance he has to do that, declared reg. ook at that needle
walk, will you? We'll hit the speed of light in a few more hours and
after that he may ust as well shut off his lens. There ust won't be
any radiation for him to catch.

raven didn't make a try at Neptune. The planet was far away when they
intersected its orbit ... furthermore, a wall of darkness had closed in
about the ships. They were going three times as fast as light and the
speed was still accelerating!

our after hour, day after day, the Invincible and its trailing
captive sped doggedly outward into space. Out into the absolute wastes
of interstellar space, where the stars were flecks of light, like tiny
eyes watching from very far away.

                                   

uss lounged in the control chair and stared out the vision plate. There
was nothing to see, nothing to do. There hadn't been anything to see or
do for days. The controls were locked at maimum and the engines still
hammered their roaring song of speed and power. Before them stretched an
empty gulf that probably never before had been traversed by any
intelligence, certainly not by man.

Out into the mystery of interstellar space. Only it didn't seem
mysterious. It was very commonplace and ordinary, almost monotonous.
uss gripped his pipe and chuckled.

There had been a day when men had maintained one couldn't go faster than
light. Also, men had claimed that it would be impossible to force nature
to give up the secret of material energy. But here they were, speeding
along faster than light, their engines roaring with the power of
material energy.

They were plowing a new space road, staking out a new path across the
deserts of space, pioneering far beyond the 'last frontier.'

reg's steps sounded across the room. We've gone a long way, uss.
Maybe we better begin to slow down a bit.

es, agreed uss. e leaned forward and grasped the controls. We'll
slow down now, he said.

Sudden silence smote the ship. Their ears, accustomed for days to the
throaty roarings of the engines, rang with the torture of no sound.

ong minutes and then new sounds began to be heard ... the soft humming
of the single engine that provided power for the interior apparatus and
the maintenance of the outer screens.

Soon as we slow down below the speed of light, said reg, we'll throw
the televisor on raven's ship and learn what we can about his
apparatus. No use trying it now, for we couldn't use it, because we're
in the same space condition it uses in normal operation.

In fact, laughed uss, we can't do much of anything ecept move.
nergies simply can't pass through this space we're in. We're marooned.

reg sat down in a chair, gazed solemnly at uss.

ust what was our top speed? he demanded.

uss grinned. Ten thousand times the speed of light, he said.

reg whistled soundlessly. A long way from home.

                                   

Far away, the stars were tiny pinpoints, like little crystals shining by
the reflection of a light. inpoints of light and shimmering masses of
lacy silver ... star dust that seemed ghostly and strange, but was in
reality the massing of many million mighty stars. And great empty black
spaces where there was not a single light, where the dark went on and on
and did not stop.

reg ehaled his breath softly. Well, we're here.

Wherever that might be, amended uss.

There were no familiar constellations, not a single familiar star. very
sign post of the space they had known was wiped out.

There really aren't any brilliant stars, said uss. None at all. We
must be in a sort of hole in space, a place that's relatively empty of
any stars.

reg nodded soberly. ood thing we have those mechanical shadows.
Without them we'd never find our way back home. But we have several that
will lead us back.

Outside the vision panel, they could see raven's ship. Freed now of the
space field, it was floating slowly, still under the grip of the
momentum they had built up in their dash across space. It was so close
that they could see the lettering across its bow.

So they call it the Interplanetarian, said uss.

reg nodded. uess it's about time we talk to them. I'm afraid they're
getting pretty nervous.

                                   

Do you have any idea where we are? demanded udwig Stutsman.

raven shook his head. No more idea than you have. Manning snaked us
across billions of miles, clear out of the Solar System into
interstellar space. Take a look at those stars and you get some idea.

Spencer hambers stroked his gray mustache, asked calmly: What do you
figure our chances are of getting back?

That's something we'll know more about later, said raven. Doesn't
look too bright right now. I'm not worrying about that. What I'm
wondering about is what Manning and age are going to do now that they
have us out here.

I thought you'd be, said a voice that came out of clear air.

They stared at the place from which the voice had seemed to come. There
was a slight refraction in the air; then, swiftly, a man took shape. It
was Manning. e stood before them, smiling.

ello, Manning, said raven. I figured you'd pay us a call when you
got around to it.

ook here, snarled Stutsman, but he stopped when hambers' hand fell
upon his shoulder, gripped it hard.

ot plenty of air? asked reg.

Air? Sure. Atmosphere machines working perfectly, raven replied.

Fine, said reg. ow about food and water? lenty of both?

lenty, said raven.

ook here, Manning, broke in hambers, where's all this questioning
leading? What have you got up your sleeve?

ust wanted to be sure, reg told him. Would hate to have you fellows
starve on me, or go thirsty. Wouldn't want to come back and find you all
dead.

ome back? asked hambers wonderingly. I'm afraid I don't understand.
Is this a oke of some sort?

No oke, said reg grimly. I thought you might have guessed. I'm
going to leave you here.

eave us here? roared Stutsman.

eep your shirt on, snapped reg. ust for a while, until we can go
back to the Solar System and finish a little ob we're doing. Then we'll
come back and get you.

raven grimaced. I thought it would be something like that. e
squinted at Manning through the thick lenses. ou never miss a bet, do
you?

reg laughed. I try not to.

A little silence fell upon the three men and Manning's image.

reg broke it. ow about your energy collector? he asked raven. Will
it maintain the ship out here? ou get cosmic rays. Not too much else,
I'm afraid.

raven grinned wryly. ou're right, but we can get along. The
accumulators are practically drained, though, and we won't be able to
store anything. Would you mind shooting us over ust a little power?
nough to charge the accumulators a little for emergency use.

e looked over his shoulder, almost apprehensively.

There might be an emergency out here, you know. Nobody knows anything
about this place.

I'll give you a little power, reg agreed.

Thank you very much, said raven, half in mockery. No doubt you think
yourself quite smart, Manning, getting us out here. ou know you have us
stranded, that we can't collect more than enough power to live on.

That's why I did it, reg said, and vanished.




AT NINTN


raven watched the Invincible gather speed and tear swiftly through
the black, saw it grow tiny and then disappear entirely, either
swallowed by the distance or snapping into the strange super-space that
eisted beyond the speed of light.

e turned from the window, chuckling.

Stutsman snarled at him: What's so funny?

The scientist glared at the wolfish face and without speaking, walked to
the desk and sat down. e reached for pencil and paper.

hambers walked over to watch him.

ou've found something, Doctor, he said quietly.

raven laughed, throatily. es, I have. I've found a lot. Manning
thinks he can keep us out here, but he's wrong. We'll be in the Solar
System less than a week after he gets there.

hambers stifled a gasp, tried to speak calmly. ou mean this?

Of course I mean it. I don't waste my time with foolish okes.

ou have the secret of material energy?

Not that, the scientist growled, but I have something else as
valuable. I have the secret of Manning's drive: I know what it is that
enables him to eceed the speed of light ... to go ten thousand times as
fast as light ... the ord knows how much faster if he wanted to.

No ordinary drive would do that, said hambers. It would take more
than power to make a ship go that fast.

ou bet your life it would, and Manning is the boy who's got it. e
uses a space field. I think I can duplicate it.

And how long will it take you to do this work?

About a week, raven told him. erhaps a little longer, perhaps a
little less. But once we go, we'll go as fast as Manning does. We'll be
short on power, but I think I can do something about that, too.

hambers took a chair beside the desk. But do we know the way home?

We can find it, said raven.

But there are no familiar constellations, obected hambers. e
dragged us out so far that there isn't a single star that any one of us
can identify.

I said I'd find the Solar System, raven declared impatiently, and I
will. Manning started out for it, didn't he? I saw the way he went. The
Sun is a type  star and all I'll do is look for a type  star.

But there may be more than one type  star, obected the financier.

robably are, raven agreed, but there are other ways of finding the
Sun and identifying it.

e volunteered no further information, went back to work with the pad
and pencil. hambers rose wearily from his chair.

Tell me when you know what we can do, he said.

Sure, raven grunted.

                                   

That's the Sun, said raven. That faint star between those two
brighter ones.

Are you sure of it? demanded Stutsman.

Of course. I don't make blunders.

It's the only type  star in that direction, suggested hambers,
helpfully.

Not that, either, declared raven. In fact, there are several type 
stars. I eamined them all and I know I'm right.

ow do you know? challenged Stutsman.

Spectroscopic eamination. That collector field of ours gathers energy
ust like a burning glass. ou've seen a burning glass, haven't you?

e stared at Stutsman, directing the question at him.

Stutsman shuffled awkwardly, unhappily.

Well, raven went on, I used that for a telescope. athered the light
from the suns and analyzed it. Of course it didn't act like a real
telescope, produce an image or anything like that, but it was ideal for
spectroscopic work.

They waited for him to eplain. Finally, he continued:

All of the stars I eamined were ust type  stars, nothing else, but
there was a difference in one of them. First, the spectroscope showed
lines of reflected light passing through oygen and hydrogen, water
vapor and carbon dioide. ure planetary phenomena, never found on a
star itself. Also it showed that a certain per cent of the light was
polarized. Now remember that I eamined it for a long time and I found
out something else from the length of observation which convinces me.
The light varied with a periodic irregularity. The chronometers aren't
working eactly right out here, so I can't give you any eplanation in
terms of hours. But I find a number of regularly recurring changes in
light intensity and character ... and that proves the presence of a
number of planetary bodies circling the star. That's the only way one
could eplain the fluctuations for the -type star is a steady type. It
doesn't vary greatly and has no light fluctuations to speak of. Not like
the epheid and Mira types.

And that proves it's our Sun? asked hambers.

raven nodded. Fairly definitely, I'd say.

ow far away is it? Stutsman wanted to know.

                                   

raven snorted. ou would ask something like that.

But, declared Stutsman, there are ways of measuring how far a star is
away from any point, measuring both the distance and the size of the
star.

Okay, agreed raven, you find me something solid and within reach
that's measurable. Something, preferably, about  million miles or so
across. Then I'll tell you how far we are from the Sun. This ship is not
in an orbit. It's not fied in space. I have no accurate way of
measuring distances and angles simultaneously and accurately. specially
angles as small as these would be.

raven and Stutsman glared at one another.

It's a long way however you look at it, the financier said. If we're
going to get there, we'll have to start as soon as possible. ow soon
can we start, Doctor?

ery soon. I have the gravity concentration field developed and
Manning left me ust enough power to get a good start. e chuckled,
took off his glasses, wiped the lenses and put them back on again.
Imagine him giving me that power!

But after we use up that power, what are we going to do? demanded
hambers. This collector lens of yours won't furnish us enough to keep
going.

ou're right, raven conceded, but we'll be able to get more. We'll
build up what speed we can and then we'll shut off the drive and let
momentum carry us along. In the meantime our collector will gather power
for us. We're advancing toward the source of radiation now, instead of
away from it. Out here, where there's little gravity stress, fewer
conflicting lines of gravitation, we'll be able to spread out the field,
widen it, make it thousands of miles across. And the new photo-cells
will be a help as well.

ow are the photo-cells coming? asked hambers.

raven grinned. We'll have a bank of them in within a few hours, and
replace the others as fast as we can. I have practically the whole crew
at work on them. Manning doesn't know it, but he found the limit of
those photo-cells when he was heaving energy at us back in the Solar
System. e blistered them. I wouldn't have thought it possible, but it
was. ou have to hand it to Manning and age. They are a couple of smart
men.

To the eye there was only one slight difference between the old cells
and the new ones. The new type cell, when on no load, appeared milky
white, whereas the old cells on no load were silvery. The granular
surface of the new units was responsible for the difference in
appearance, for each minute section of the surface was covered with even
more minute metallic heagonal pyramids and prisms.

ust a little matter of variation in the alloy, raven eplained.
rystalization of the alloy, forming those little prisms and pyramids.
As a result, you get a surface thousands of times greater than in the
old type. elps you absorb every bit of the energy.

                                   

The Interplanetarian arrowed swiftly starward, driving ahead with
terrific momentum while the collector lens, sweeping up the oncoming
radiations, charged the great banks of accumulators. The -type star
toward which they were heading was still pale, but the two brighter
stars to either side blazed like fiery ewels against the black of
space.

ou say we'll be only a week or so behind Manning? asked hambers.

raven looked at the financier, his eyes narrowed behind the heavy
lenses. e sucked in his loose lips and turned once again to the control
board.

erhaps a little longer, he admitted finally. We're losing time,
having to go along on momentum in order to collect power. But the nearer
we get to those stars, the more power we'll have and we'll be able to
move faster.

hambers drummed idly on the arm of his chair, thinking.

erhaps there's time yet, he said, half to himself. With the power
we'll have within the Solar System, we can stop Manning and the
revolution. We can gain control again.

                                   

raven was silent, watching the dials.

Manning might even pass us on the way back to look for us, hambers
went on. e thinks we're still out there. e wouldn't epect to find us
where we are, light years from where we started.

raven shot him a curious look. I wouldn't be too sure of that. Manning
has a string of some sort tied to us. e's got us tagged ... good and
proper. e's always been able to find us again, no matter where we were.
I have a hunch he'll find us again, even way out here.

hambers shrugged his shoulders. It really doesn't matter. ust so we
get close enough to the Sun so we can load those accumulators and am
the photo-cells full. With a load like that we can beat him hands down.

The financier fell into a silence. e stared out of the vision plate,
watching the stars. Still far away, but so much nearer than they had
been.

is brain hummed with dreams. Old dreams, revived again, old dreams of
conquest and of empire, dreams of a power that held a solar system in
its grip.

raven broke his chain of thoughts. Where's our friend Stutsman? I
haven't seen him around lately.

hambers chuckled good-naturedly. e's sulking. e seems to have gotten
the idea neither one of us likes him. e's been spending most of his
time back in the engine room with the crew.

Were you talking about me? asked a silky voice.

They spun around to see Stutsman standing in the doorway of the control
room. is face was twisted into a wolfish grin and in his right hand he
held a heat gun.

hambers' voice was sharp, like the note of a clanging bell. What's
this?

Stutsman's face twisted into an even more eaggerated grin. This, he
said, is mutiny. I'm taking over! e laughed at them.

No use calling the crew. They're with me.

Damn you! shouted hambers, taking a step forward. e halted as
Stutsman erked the pistol up.

Forget it, hambers. ou're ust second man from now on. Maybe not even
second man. ou tried out this dictator business and you bungled it. ou
went soft. ou're taking orders from me from now on. No questions, no
back talk. ou do as I say and maybe you won't get hurt.

ou're mad, Stutsman! cried hambers. ou can't get away with this.

Stutsman barked out a brittle laugh. Who is going to stop me?

The people, hambers shouted at him. The people will. They won't
allow this. When you get back to the Solar System ...

Stutsman growled, stepping toward hambers, pistol leveled. The people
won't have anything to say about this. I'll rule the Solar System the
way I want to. There won't be anyone else who'll have a thing to say
about it. So you dreamed of empire, did you? ou dreamed of a solar
dictatorship. Well, watch me! I'll build a real empire. But I'll be the
head of it ... not you.

raven sat down in his chair, crossed his knees. ust what do you plan
to do, Dictator Stutsman?

                                   

Stutsman fairly foamed at the mouth over the insolence of raven's
voice. I'll smash Manning first. I'll wipe him out. This ship will do
it. ou said yourself it would. ou have ten times the power he has. And
then ...

raven raised a hand and waved him into silence. So you plan to reach
the Solar System, do you? ou plan to meet Manning, and destroy his
ship. Nice plan.

What's wrong with it? challenged Stutsman.

Nothing, said raven calmly. Absolutely nothing at all ... ecept
that we may never reach the Solar System!

Stutsman seemed to sag. The wolfish snarl on his lips drooped. is eyes
stared. Then with an effort he braced himself.

What do you mean? Why can't we? e gestured toward the vision plate,
toward the tiny yellow star between the two brighter stars.

That, said raven, isn't our Sun. It has planets, but it isn't our
Sun.

hambers stepped quickly to raven, reached out a hand and hoisted him
from the chair, shook him.

ou must be oking! That has to be the Sun!

raven shrugged free of hambers' clutch, spoke in an even voice. I
never oke. We made a mistake, that's all. I hadn't meant to tell you
yet. I had intended to get in close to the star and take on a full load
of power and then try to locate our Sun. But I'm afraid it's a hopeless
task.

A hopeless task? shrieked Stutsman. ou are trying to trick me. This
is put up between the two of you. That's the Sun over there. I know it
is!

It isn't, said raven. Manning tricked us. e started off in the
wrong direction. e made us think he was going straight back to the
Solar System, but he didn't. e circled and went in some other
direction.

The scientist eyed Stutsman calmly. Stutsman's knuckles were white with
the grip he had upon the gun.

We're lost, raven told him, looking squarely at him. We may never
find the Solar System!




AT TWNT


The revolution was over. Interplanetary officials and army heads had
fled to the sanctuary of arth. Interplanetary was ended ... ended
forever, for on every world, including arth, material energy engines
were humming. The people had power to burn, to throw away, power so
cheap that it was practically worthless as a commodity, but invaluable
as a way to a new life, a greater life, a fuller life ... a broader
destiny for the human race.

Interplanetary stocks were worthless. The mighty power plants on enus
and Mercury were idle. The only remaining tangible asset were the fleets
of spaceships used less than a month before to ship the accumulators to
the outer worlds, to bring them Sunward for recharging.

atents protecting the rights to the material energy engines had been
obtained from every government throughout the Solar System. New
governments were being formed on the wreckage of the old. ohn Moore
Mallory already had been inaugurated as president of the ovian
confederacy. The elections on Mars and enus would be held within a
week.

Mercury, its usefulness gone with the smashing of the accumulator trade,
had been abandoned. No human foot now trod its surface. Its mighty domes
were empty. It went its way, as it had gone for billions of years, a
little burned out, worthless planet, ignored and shunned. For a brief
moment it had known the conquering tread of mankind, had played its part
in the commerce of the worlds, but now it had reverted to its former
state ... a lonely wanderer of the regions near the Sun, a pariah among
the other planets.

                                   

ussell age looked across the desk at regory Manning. e heaved a sigh
and dug the pipe out of his acket pocket.

It's finished, reg, he said.

reg nodded solemnly, watching uss fill the bowl and apply the match.

cept for the small crew, they were alone in the Invincible. ohn
Moore Mallory and the others were on their own worlds, forming their own
governments, carrying out the dictates of the people, men who would go
down in solar history.

The Invincible hung ust off allisto. uss looked out at the mighty
moon, saw the lonely stretches of its ice-bound surface, saw the silvery
spot that was the dome of anthoor.

All done, said reg, ecept for one thing.

o out and get hambers and the others, said uss, puffing at the
pipe.

reg nodded. We may as well get started.

uss rose slowly, went to the wall cabinet and lifted out a bo, the
mechanical shadow with its tiny space field surrounding the fleck of
steel that would lead them to the Interplanetarian. arefully he
lifted the machine from its resting place and set it on the desk.
Bending over it, he watched the dials.

Suddenly he whistled. reg, they've moved! They aren't where we left
them!

reg sprang to his side and stared at the readings. They're moving
farther away from us ... out into space. Where can they be going?

uss straightened, scowling, pulling at the pipe. They probably found
another -type star, and are heading for that. They must think it is old
Sol.

That sounds like it, said reg. We spun all over the map to throw
raven off and looped several times so he'd lose all sense of direction.
Naturally he would be lost.

But he's evidently got something, uss pointed out. We left him
marooned ... dead center, out where he didn't have too much radiation
and couldn't get leverage on any single body. et he's moving--and
getting farther away all the time.

e solved our gravitation concentration screen, said reg. e tricked
us into giving him power to build it.

The two men looked at one another for a long minute.

Well, said uss, that's that. raven and hambers and Stutsman. The
three villains. All lost in space. eading for the wrong star.
opelessly lost. Maybe they'll never find their way back.

e stopped and relit his pipe. An aching silence fell in the room.

oetic ustice, said uss. ail and farewell.

reg rubbed his fist indecisively along the desk. I can't do it, uss.
We took them out there. We marooned them. We have to get them back or I
couldn't sleep nights.

uss laughed quietly, watching the bleak face that stared at him. I
knew that's what you'd say.

e knocked out the pipe, crushed a fleck of burning tobacco with his
boot. ocketing the pipe, he walked to the control panel, sat down and
reached for the lever. The engines hummed louder and louder. The
Invincible darted spaceward.

                                   

It's too late now, said hambers. By the time we reach that planetary
system and charge our accumulators, Manning and age will have
everything under control back in the Solar System. ven if we could
locate the star that was our Sun, we wouldn't have a chance to get there
in time.

Too bad, raven said, and wagged his head, looking like a solemn owl.
Too bad. Dictator Stutsman won't have a chance to strut his stuff.

Stutsman started to say something and thought better of it. e leaned
back in his chair. From his belt hung a heat pistol.

hambers eyed the pistol with ill-concealed disgust. There's no point
in playing soldier. We aren't going to try to upset your mutiny. So far
your taking over the ship hasn't made any difference to us ... so why
should we fight you?

It isn't going to make any difference either, said raven. Because
there are ust two things that will happen to us. We're either lost
forever, will never find our way back, will spend the rest of our days
wandering from star to star, or Manning will come out and take us by the
ear and lead us home again.

hambers started, leaned forward and fastened his steely eyes on raven.
Do you really think he could find us?

I have no doubt of it, raven replied. I don't know how he does it,
but I'm convinced he can. robably, however, he'll find that we are lost
and get rid of us that way.

No, said hambers, you're wrong there. Manning wouldn't do that.
e'll come to get us.

I don't know why he should, snapped raven.

Because he's that sort of man, declared hambers.

What you going to do when he does get out here? demanded Stutsman.
Fall on his neck and kiss him?

hambers smiled, stroked his mustache. Why, no, he said. I imagine
we'll fight. We'll give him everything we've got and he'll do the same.
It wouldn't seem natural if we didn't.

ou're damned right we will, growled Stutsman. Because I'm running
this show. ou seem to keep forgetting that. We have power enough, when
we get those accumulators filled, to wipe him out. And that is eactly
what I'm going to do.

Fine, said raven, mockingly, ust fine. There's ust one thing you
forget. Manning is the only man who can lead us back to the Solar
System.

ell, stormed Stutsman, that doesn't make any difference. I'll find
my way back there some way.

ou're afraid of Manning, hambers challenged.

Stutsman's hand went down to the heat pistol's grip. is eyes glazed and
his face twisted itself into utter hatred. I don't know why I keep on
letting you live. raven is valuable to me. I can't kill him. But you
aren't. ou aren't worth a damn to anyone.

                                   

hambers matched his stare. Stutsman's hand dropped from the pistol and
he slouched to his feet, walked from the room.

Afraid of Manning! e laughed, a hollow, gurgling laugh. Afraid of
Manning!

But he was.

Within his brain hammered a single sentence. Words he had heard Manning
speak as he watched over the television set at Manning's mocking
invitation. Words that beat into his brain and seared his reason and
made his soul shrivel and grow small.

Manning talking to Scorio. Talking to him matter-of-factly, but grimly:
I promise you that we'll take care of Stutsman!

Manning had taken Scorio and his gangsters one by one and sent them to
far corners of the Solar System. One out to the dreaded ulcan Fleet,
one to the Outpost, one to the Titan prison, and one to the hell-hole
on esta, while Scorio had gone to a little mountain set in a enus
swamp. They hadn't a chance. They had been locked within a force shell
and shunted through millions of miles of space. No trial, no hearing ...
nothing. ust terrible, unrelenting udgment.

I promise you that we'll take care of Stutsman!

                                   

raven's only a few billion miles ahead now, said regory Manning.
With our margin of speed, we should overhaul him in a few more hours.
e is still short on power, but he's remedying that rapidly. e's
getting nearer to that sun every minute. unning in toward it as he is,
he tends to sweep up outpouring radiations. That helps him collect a
whole lot more than he would under ordinary circumstances.

uss, sitting before the controls, pipe clenched in his teeth, watching
the dials, nodded soberly.

All I'm afraid of, he said, is that he'll get too close to that sun
before we catch up with him. If he gets close enough so he can fill
those accumulators, he'll pack a bigger wallop than we do. It'll all be
in one bolt, of course, for his power isn't continuous like ours. e has
to collect it slowly. But when he's really loaded, he can give us aces
and still win. I'd hate to take everything he could pack into those
accumulators.

reg shuddered. So would I.

The Invincible was eceeding the speed of light, was enveloped in the
mysterious darkness that characterized the speed. They could see nothing
outside the ship, for there was nothing to see. But the tiny mechanical
shadow, occupying a place of honor on the navigation board, kept them
informed of the position and the distance of the Interplanetarian.

reg lolled in his chair, watching uss.

I don't think we need to worry about him throwing the entire load of
the accumulators at us, he said. e wouldn't dare load those
accumulators to peak capacity. e's got to leave enough carrying
capacity in the cells to handle any olts we send him and he knows we
can send him plenty. e has to keep that handling margin at all times,
over and above what he takes in for power, because his absorption screen
is also a defensive screen. And he has to use some power to keep our
television apparatus out.

uss chuckled. I suppose, at that, we have him plenty worried.

The thunder of the engines filled the control room. For days now that
thunder had been in their ears. They had grown accustomed to it, now
hardly noticed it. Ten mighty engines, driving the Invincible at a
pace no other ship had ever obtained, ecept, possibly, the
Interplanetarian, although lack of power should have held raven's
ship down to a lower speed. raven wouldn't have dared to build up the
acceleration they had now attained, for he would have drained his banks
and been unable to charge them again.

Maybe he won't fight, said uss. Maybe he's figured out by this time
that he's heading for the wrong star. e may be glad to see us and
follow us back to the Solar System.

No chance of that. raven and hambers won't pass up a chance for a
fight. They'll give us a few wallops if only for the appearance of
things.

We're crawling up all the time, said uss. If we can catch him within
four or five billion miles of the star, he won't be too tough to handle.
Be getting plenty of radiations even then, but not quite as much as he
would like to have.

e'll have to start decelerating pretty soon, reg declared. e can't
run the chance of smashing into the planetary system at the speed he's
going. e won't want to waste too much power using his field as a brake,
because he must know by this time that we're after him and he'll want
what power he has to throw at us.

ours passed. The Invincible crept nearer and nearer, suddenly seemed
to leap ahead as the Interplanetarian began deceleration.

eep giving her all you got, reg urged uss. We've got plenty of
power for braking. We can overhaul him and stop in a fraction of the
time he does.

uss nodded grimly. The distance indicator needle on the mechanical
shadow slipped off rapidly. reg, leaping from his chair, hung over it,
breathlessly.

I think, he said, we better slow down now. If we don't, we'll be
inside the planetary system.

ow far out is raven? asked uss.

Not far enough, reg replied unhappily. e can't be more than three
billion miles from the star and that star's hot. A class , all right,
but a good deal younger than old Sol.

                                   

We'll let them know we've arrived, grinned reg. e sent a stabbing
beam of half a billion horsepower slashing at the Interplanetarian.

The other ship staggered but steadied itself.

They know, said uss cryptically from his position in front of the
vision plate. We shook them up a bit.

They waited. Nothing happened.

reg scratched his head. Maybe you were right. Maybe they don't want to
fight.

Together they watched the Interplanetarian. It was still moving in
toward the distant sun, as if nothing had happened.

We'll see, said reg.

Back at the controls he threw out a gigantic tractor beam, catching the
other ship in a net of forces that visibly cut its speed.

Space suddenly vomited lashing flame that slapped back and licked and
crawled in living streamers over the surface of the Invincible. The
engines moaned in their valiant battle to keep up the outer screen. The
pungent odor of ozone filtered into the control room. The whole ship was
bucking and vibrating, creaking, as if it were being pulled apart.

So they don't want to fight, eh? hooted uss.

reg gritted his teeth. They snapped the tractor beam.

They have power there, uss declared.

Too much, said reg. More power than they have any right to have.

is hand went out to the lever on the board and pulled it back. A beam
smashed out, with the engines' screaming drive behind it, billions of
horsepower driving with unleashed ferocity at the other ship.

reg's hand spun a dial, while the generators roared thunderous
defiance.

I'm giving them the radiation scale, said reg.

The Interplanetarian was staggering under the terrific bombardment,
but its screen was handling every ounce of the power that reg was
pouring into it.

Their photo-cells can't handle that, cried uss. No photo-cell would
handle all that stuff you're shooting at them. nless ...

nless what?

nless raven has improved on them.

We'll have to find out. et the televisor.

                                   

uss leaped for the television machine.

A moment later he lifted a haggard face.

I can't get through, he said. raven's got our beams stopped and now
he has our television blocked out.

reg nodded. We might have epected that. When he could scramble our
televisors back in the ovian worlds, he certainly ought to be able to
screen his ship against them.

e shoved the lever clear over, slamming the etreme limit of power
into the beam. The engines screamed like demented things, howling and
shrieking. Instantly a tremendous sheet of solid flame spun a fiery web
around the Interplanetarian, turning it into a blazing inferno of
lapping, leaping fire.

A dozen terrific beams, billions of horsepower in each, stabbed back at
the Invincible as the Interplanetarian shunted the terrific energy
influ from the overcharged accumulators to the various automatic energy
discharges.

The Invincible's screen flared in defense and the ten great engines
wailed in utter agony. More stabbing flame shot from the
Interplanetarian in slow eplosions.

The temperature in the Invincible's control room was rising. The ozone
was sharp enough to make their eyes water and nostrils burn. The vision
glass was blanked out by the lapping flames that crawled and writhed
over the screen outside the glass.

uss tore his collar open, wiped his face with his shirt sleeve. Try a
pure magnetic!

reg, his face set and bleak as a wall of stone, grunted agreement. is
fingers danced over the control manual.

Suddenly the stars outside twisted and danced, like stars gone mad, as
if they were dancing a riotous ig in space, some uproariously hopping
up and down while others were applauding the show that was being
provided for their unblinking eyes.

The magnetic field was tightening now, twisting the light from those
distant stars and bending it straight again. The Interplanetarian
reeled like a drunken thing and the great arcs of electric flame looped
madly and plunged straight for the field's very heart.

                                   

The stars danced weirdly in far-off space again as the
Interplanetarian's accumulators lashed out with tremendous force to
oppose the energy of the field.

The field glowed softly and disappeared.

They have us stopped at every turn, groaned uss. There must be some
way, something we can do. e looked at reg. reg grinned without
humor, wiping his face. There is something we can do, said uss
grimly. We should have thought of it long ago.

e strode to the desk, reached out one hand and drew a calculator near.

ou keep them busy, he snapped. I'll have this thing figured out in
ust a while.

From the engine rooms came the roar and hum of the laboring units and
the Invincible shuddered once again as reg grimly hurled one beam
after another, at the Interplanetarian.

The Interplanetarian struck back, using radio frequency that flamed
fiercely against the Invincible's outer screen. Simultaneously the
Interplanetarian leaped forward with a sudden surge of accumulated
energy, driving at the star that lay not more than three billion miles
away.

reg worked desperately, cursing under his breath. e pulled down the
outer screen that was fighting directly against the radio frequency,
energy for energy, and allowed the beam to strike squarely on the second
screen, the inversion field that shunted the maor portion of the energy
impacting against it through  degrees into another space.

The engines moaned softly and settled into a quieter rumble as the
necessity of supplying the first screen was eliminated. But they
screamed once again as reg sent out a tractor beam that seized and
held, dragged the Interplanetarian to a standstill. raven's ship had
gained millions of miles, though, and established a tremendous advantage
by fighting nearer to its source of energy.

uss, gasped reg, if you don't get that scheme of yours figured out
pretty soon, we're done for. They've stopped everything we've got.
They're nearer the sun. We won't stand a chance if they make another
break like that.

uss glanced up to answer, but his mouth fell open in amazement and he
did not speak. A streak of terrible light was striking at them from the
Interplanetarian, blinding white light, and along that highway of
light swarmed a horde of little green figures, like squirming green
amebas. Swarming toward the Invincible, stretching out hungry,
pale-green pseudopods toward the inversion barrier ... and eating
through it!

Wherever they touched, holes appeared. They drifted through the
inversion screen easily and began drilling into the inner screen of
anti-entropy. ating their way into the anti-entropy ... into a state
of matter which uss and reg had thought would resist all change!

                                   

For seconds both men stood transfied, unable to believe the evidence of
their eyes. But the ameba things came on in ever-increasing throngs,
creatures that gnawed and slobbered at the anti-entropy, eating into it,
flaking it away, drilling their way through it.

When they pierced the anti-entropy, they would cut through the steel
plates of the Invincible like so much paper!

And more were coming. More and more!

With a grunt of amazement, reg slammed a beam straight into the heart
of the amebas. They ate the beam and vanished as mistily as before,
little glowing things that ate and died. But there were always more to
take their place. They overwhelmed the beam and ate back along its
length, attacked the screen again.

They ate through walls of force and walls of metal, and a rush of
hissing air began to flame into ions in the terrific battle of energies
outside the Invincible.

uss was crouching over the manual of the televisor board. is breath
moaned in his throat as his fingers flew.

I have to have power, reg, he said. ots of power.

Take it. reg replied. I haven't been able to do anything with it. It
isn't any use to me.

uss's thumb reached out and tripped the activating lever. The giant
engines shrieked and yowled.

Something was happening on the television screen ... something
terrifying. raven's ship seemed to retreat suddenly for millions of
miles ... and as suddenly the Invincible appeared on the screen. For a
single flashing instant, the view held; then it was gone in blank
grayness. For seconds nothing happened on the screen, unnerving seconds
while the two men held their breath.

The screen's grayness fled and they looked into the control room of the
Interplanetarian. raven was hunched in a chair, intent upon a series
of controls. Behind him and to one side stood Stutsman, a heat pistol
dangled from his hand, his face twisted into a sneer of triumph. There
was no sign of hambers.

ou damn fool, raven was snapping at Stutsman. ou're cheating us
out of the only chance we ever had of getting home.

                                   

Shut up, snarled Stutsman, the pistol erking in his hand. ave you
got that apparatus on full power?

It's been on full power for minutes now, said raven. It must be
eating holes straight through Manning's ship.

See you keep it that way. I really don't need you any more, anyhow.
I've watched and I know all the tricks. I could carry on this battle
single-handed.

raven did not reply, merely hunched closer over the controls, eyes
watching flickering dials.

reg ogged uss's elbow. That must be the apparatus over there, in the
corner of the room. That triangular affair. A condenser of some sort.
That stuff they're throwing at us must be super-saturated force fields
and they'd need a space-field condenser for that.

uss nodded. We'll take care of that.

is fingers moved swiftly and a transport beam whipped out, riding the
television beam. Bands of force wrapped around the triangular machine
and wrenched viciously. In the screen the apparatus disappeared ...
simply was gone. It now lay within the Invincible's control room,
erked there by the tele-transport.

The flood of dazzling light reaching out from the Interplanetarian
snapped off and the little green ameba things were gone. The shrill
whistle of escaping air stopped as the eaten screens clamped down again,
sealing in the atmosphere despite the holes bored through the metal
plates.

In the television screen, raven leaped from his chair, was staring with
Stutsman at the place where the concentrator had stood. The machine had
been ripped from a welded base and agged, bright, torn metal gleamed in
the control room lights. Snapped cables and broken busbars lay piled
about the room.

What happened? Stutsman was screaming. They heard raven laugh at the
terror in the other's voice. Manning ust walked in and grabbed it away
from us.

But he couldn't! We had the screen up! e couldn't get through!

raven shrugged his shoulders. I don't know how he did it, but he did.
robably he could clean out the whole place if he wanted to.

That's a good idea, said uss, udiciously.

e stripped bank after bank of the other ship's photo-cells from their
moorings, wrecked the force field controls, ripped cables from the
engines and left the ship without means of collecting power, without
means of using power, without means of movement, of offense or defense.

                                   

e leaned back in his chair and regarded the screen with deep
satisfaction.

That, he decided, should hold them for a while.

e hauled the pipe out of his pocket and filled it from the battered
leather pouch.

reg regarded him with a quizzical stare. ou sent the televisor back
in time. ou got it inside the Interplanetarian before raven had run
up his screen and then you brought it forward.

ou guessed it, said uss, tamping the tobacco into the bowl. We
should have thought of that long ago. We have a time factor there. In
fact, the whole thing revolves around time. We move the televisor, we
use the tele-transport, by giving the obects we wish to move an
acceleration in time.

reg wrinkled his brow. Maybe that means we can really investigate the
past, or even the future. an sit here before our screen and see
everything that has happened, everything that is going to happen.

uss shook his head. I don't know, reg. Notice, though, that we got no
screen response until the televisor came up out of the past and actually
reached the point which coincided with the present. That is, the screen
and the televisor itself have to be on the same time level for them to
operate. We might modify the screen, even modify the televisor so that
we could travel in time, but it will take a lot of research, a lot of
work. And especially it will take a whale of a lot of power.

We have the power, said reg.

uss moved the lighter back and forth over the tobacco, igniting it
carefully. louds of blue smoke swirled around his head. e spoke out of
the smoke.

ight now, he said, we better see how raven and our other friends
are getting along. I didn't like the way Stutsman was talking or the way
he was swinging that gun around. And hambers wasn't anywhere in sight.
There's something screwy about the entire thing.

                                   

What are we going to do now? demanded Stutsman.

raven grinned at him. That's up to you. emember, you're the master
mind around here. ou took over and said you were going to run things.
e waved a casual hand at the shattered machines, the ripped-out
apparatus. Well, there you are. o ahead and run the oint.

But you will have to help, pleaded Stutsman, his face twisted until it
seemed that he was suffering intense physical agony. ou know what to
do. I don't.

raven shook his head. There isn't any use starting. Manning will be
along almost anytime now. We'll wait and see what he has in mind.

Manning! shrieked Stutsman, waving the pistol wildly. Always Manning.
One would think you were working for Manning.

e's the big shot out in this little corner of space right now, raven
pointed out. There isn't any way you can get around that.

Stutsman backed carefully away. is gun came up and he looked at raven
appraisingly, as if selecting his targets.

ut down that gun, said a voice.

regory Manning stood between Stutsman and raven. There had been no
foggy forerunner of his appearance. e had ust snapped out of empty
air.

Stutsman stared at him, his eyes widening, but the gun remained steady
in his hand.

ook out, raven, warned reg. e's going to fire and it will go
right through me and hit you.

                                   

There was the thump of a falling body as raven hurled himself out of
his chair, hit the floor and rolled. Stutsman's gun vomited flame. The
spouting flame passed through reg's image, blasted against the chair in
which raven had sat, fused it until it fell in on itself.

uss, said reg quietly, disarm this fellow before he hurts
somebody.

An unseen force reached out and twisted the gun from Stutsman's hand,
flung it to one side. Swiftly Stutsman's hands were forced behind his
back and held there by invisible bonds.

Stutsman cried out, tried to struggle, but he was unable to move. It was
as if giant hands had gripped him, were holding him in a viselike
clutch.

Thanks, Manning, said raven, getting up off the floor. The fool
would have shot this time. e's threatened it for days. e has been
developing a homicidal mania.

We don't need to worry about him now, declared reg. e turned around
to face raven. Where's hambers?

Stutsman locked him up, said raven. I imagine he has the key in his
pocket. ocked him up in the stateroom. hambers umped him and tried to
take the gun away from him and Stutsman laid him out, hit him over the
head. e kept hambers locked up after that. asn't allowed anyone to go
near the room. asn't even given him food and water. That was three days
ago.

et the key out of his pocket, directed reg. o and see how hambers
is.

Alone in the control room with Stutsman, reg looked at him.

I have a score to settle with you, Stutsman, he said. I had intended
to let it ride, but not now.

ou can't touch me, blustered Stutsman. ou wouldn't dare.

What makes you think I wouldn't?

ou're bluffing. ou've got a lot of tricks, but you can't do the
things you would like me to think you can. ou've got hambers and
raven fooled, but not me.

It may be that I can offer you definite proof.

hambers staggered over the threshold. is clothing was rumpled. A rude
bandage was wound around his head. is face was haggard and his eyes
red.

ello, Manning, he said. I suppose you've won. The Solar System must
be in your control by now.

e lifted his hand to his mustache, brushed it, a feeble attempt at
playing the old role he'd acted so long.

We've won, said reg quietly, but you're wrong about our being in
control. The governments are in the hands of the people, where they
should be.

hambers nodded. I see, he mumbled. Different people, different
ideas. is eyes rested on Stutsman and reg saw sudden rage sweep
across the gray, haggard face. So you've got him, have you? What are
you going to do with him? What are you going to do with all of us?

I haven't had time to think about it, said reg. I've principally
been thinking about Stutsman here.

e mutinied, rasped hambers. e seized the ship, turned the crew
against me.

And the penalty for that, said reg, quietly, is death. Death by
walking in space.

Stutsman writhed within the bands of force that held him tight. is face
contorted. No, damn you! ou can't do that! Not to me, you can't!

Shut up, roared hambers and Stutsman quieted.

I was thinking, too, said reg, that at his order thousands of people
were mercilessly shot down back in the Solar System. Stood against a
wall and mowed down. Others were killed like wild animals in the street.
Thousands of them.

                                   

e moved slowly toward Stutsman and the man cringed.

Stutsman, he said, you're a butcher. ou're a stench in the nostrils
of humanity. ou aren't fit to live.

Those, said raven, are my sentiments eactly.

ou hate me, screamed Stutsman. All of you hate me. ou are doing
this because you hate me.

veryone hates you, Stutsman, said reg. very living person hates
you. ou have a cloud of hate hanging over you as black and wide as
space.

The man closed his eyes, trying to break free of the bonds.

Bring me a spacesuit, snapped reg, watching Stutsman's face.

raven brought it and dropped it at Stutsman's feet.

All right, uss, said reg. Turn him loose.

Stutsman swayed and almost fell as the bands of force released him.

et into that suit, ordered reg.

Stutsman hesitated, but something he saw in reg's face made him lift
the suit, step into it, fasten it about his body.

What are you going to do with me? he whimpered. ou aren't going to
take me back to arth again, are you? ou aren't going to make me stand
trial?

No, said reg, gravely, we aren't taking you back to arth. And
you're standing trial right now.

Stutsman read his fate in the cold eyes that stared into his. hattering
frightenedly, he rushed at reg, plunged through him, collided with the
wall of the ship and toppled over, feebly attempting to rise.

Invisible hands hoisted him to his feet, gripped him, held him upright.
reg walked toward him, stood facing him.

Stutsman, he said, you have four hours of air. That will give you
four hours to think, to make your peace with death. e turned toward
the other two. hambers nodded grimly. raven said nothing.

And now, said reg to raven, if you will fasten down his helmet.

The helmet clanged shut, shutting out the pleas and threats that came
from Stutsman's throat.

                                   

Stutsman saw distant stars, cruel, gleaming eyes that glared at him.
mpty space fell away on all sides.

Numbed by fear, he realized where he was. Manning had picked him up and
thrown him far into space ... out into that waste where for hundreds of
light years there was only the awful nothingness of space.

e was less than a speck of dust, in this great immensity of emptiness.
There was no up or down, no means of orientation.

oneliness and terror closed in on him, a terrible agony of fear. In
four hours his air would be gone and then he would die! is body would
swirl and eddy through this great cosmic ocean. It would never be found.
It would remain here, embalmed by the cold of space, until the last clap
of eternity.

There was one way, the easy way. is hand reached up and grasped the
connection between his helmet and the air tank. One wrench and he would
die swiftly, quickly ... instead of letting death stalk him through the
darkness for the net four hours.

e shivered and his hand loosened its hold, dropped away. e was afraid
to hasten death. e wanted to put it off. e was afraid of death ...
horribly afraid.

The stars mocked him and he seemed to hear hooting laughter from
somewhere far away. uriously, it sounded like his own laughter....

                                   

I'll make it easy for you, Manning, hambers said. I know that all of
us are guilty. uilty in the eyes of the people and the law. uilty in
your eyes. If we had won, there would have been no penalty. There's
never a penalty for the one who wins.

enalty, said reg, his eyes half smiling. Why, yes, I think there
is. I'm going to order you aboard the Invincible for something to eat
and to get some rest.

ou mean to say that we aren't prisoners?

reg shook his head. Not prisoners, he said. Why, I came out here to
guide you back to arth. I hauled you out here and got you into this
am. It was up to me to get you out of it. I would have done the same
for Stutsman, too, but ...

e hesitated and looked at hambers.

hambers stared back and slowly nodded.

es, Manning, he said. I think I understand.




AT TWNT-ON


hambers lit his cigar and leaned back in his chair.

I wish you could see it my way, Manning, he said. There's no place
for me on arth, no place for me in the Solar System. ou see, I tried
and failed. I'm ust a has-been back there.

e laughed quietly. Somehow, I can't imagine myself coming back in the
role of the defeated tribal leader, chained to your chariot, so to
speak.

But it wouldn't be that way, protested reg. our company is gone,
true, and your stocks are worthless, but you haven't lost everything.
ou still have a fleet of ships. With our new power, the Solar System
will especially need ships. ots of ships. For the spacelanes will be
filled with commerce. ou'd be coming back to a new deal, a new Solar
System, a place that has been transformed almost overnight by power
that's practically free.

es, yes, I know all that, said hambers. But I climbed too high. I
got too big. I can't come back now as something small, a failure.

ou have things we need, said reg. The screen that blankets out our
television and tele-transport, for eample. We need your screen as a
safeguard against the very thing we have created. Think of what criminal
uses could be made of the tele-transport. No vault, no net of charged
wires, nothing, could stop a thief from taking anything he wanted.
risons would cease to be prisons. riminals could reach in and pick up
their friends, no matter how many guards there were. risons and bank
vaults and national treasuries could be cleaned out in a single day.

Then there's the super-saturated space fields, added uss, ruefully.
Those almost got us. If I hadn't thought of moving the televisor
through time, we would have had to pull stakes and run for it.

No, you wouldn't, pointed out raven. ou could have wiped us out in
a moment. ou can disintegrate matter. Send it up in a puff of smoke ...
rip every electron apart and send it hurtling away.

Of course we could have, raven, said reg, but we wouldn't.

hambers laughed softly. Not quite mad enough at us to do that, eh?

reg looked at him. I guess that must have been it.

But I'm curious about the green space fields, persisted uss.

Simple, said raven. They were ust fields that had more energy
packed into a certain portion of space than space could take. Space
fields that had far more than their share of energy, more than they
could hold. A super-saturated solution will crystalize almost
immediately onto the tiniest crystal put into it. Those fields acted the
same way. They crystalized instantly into hyper-space the moment they
came into contact with other energy, whether as photons of radiation,
matter or other space fields. our anti-entropy didn't stand a chance
under those conditions. When they crystalized, they took a chunk of the
field along with them, a small chunk, but one after another they ate a
hole right through your screen.

                                   

Something like that would have a commercial value, said reg. seful
in war, too, and now that mankind has taken to space, now that we're
spreading out, we must think of possible attack. There must be life on
other planets throughout the alay. Someday they'll come. If they
don't, someday we'll go to them. And we may need every type of armament
we can get our hands on.

hambers knocked the ash off his cigar and was staring out the vision
port. The ship had swung so that through the port could be seen the
distant star toward which the Interplanetarian had been driving.

For my part, said hambers, slowly, measuring each word, you can have
those findings of ours. We'll give them to you, knowing you will use
them as they should be used. raven can tell you how they work. That is,
if raven wants to. e is the man who developed them.

ertainly, said raven. They'll be something to remember us by.

                                   

But you are coming back with us, aren't you? asked reg.

raven shook his head. No, I'm going with hambers. I don't know what
he's thinking of, but whatever it is, it's all right with me. We've been
together too long. I'd miss someone to fight with.

hambers was still staring out the vision port. e was talking, but he
did not seem to be talking to them.

I had a dream, you see. I saw the people struggling against the
inefficiency and stupidity of popular government. I saw the periodic
rise of bad leaders. I saw them lead the people into blunders. I read
history and I saw that since the time man had risen from the ape, this
had been going on. So I proposed to give the people scientific
government ... a business administration. An administration that would
have run the government eactly as a successful businessman runs his
business. The people would have resented it if I had told them they
didn't know how to run their affairs. There was only one way to do
it ... gain control and force it down their throats.

hambers was no longer a beaten man, no longer a man with a white
bandage around his head and his power stripped from him. Once again he
was the fighting financier who had sat back at the desk in the
Interplanetary building on arth and issued orders ... orders that sped
across millions of miles of space.

e shrugged his shoulders. They didn't want it. Man doesn't want to
live under scientific government. e doesn't want to be protected
against blunders. e wants what he calls freedom. The right to do the
things he wants to do, even if it means making a damn fool of himself.
The right to rise to great heights and tumble to equally low depths.
That's human nature and I ruled it out. But you can't rule out human
nature.

They sat in silence, no one speaking. uss cupped his pipe bowl in his
hand and watched hambers. hambers leaned back and slowly puffed at
the cigar. reg ust sat, his face unchanging.

raven finally broke the silence. ust what are you planning to do?

hambers flicked his hand toward the distant sun that gleamed through
the vision port.

There's a new solar system out there, he said. New worlds, a new sun.
A place to start over again. ou and I discovered it. It's ours by right
of discovery. We'll go there and stake out our claim.

But there may be nothing there, protested reg. That sun is younger
than our Sun. The planets may not have cooled as yet. ife may not have
developed.

In such a case, said hambers, we shall find another planetary system
around another sun. A system that has cooled, where there is life.

uss gasped. ere was something important, something that should set a
precedent. The first men to roam from star to star seeking new worlds.
The first men to turn their backs on the old solar system and strike out
in search of new worlds swinging in their paths around distant suns.

reg was saying, All right, if that's the way you want it. I was hoping
you'd come back with us. But we'll help you repair your ship. We'll give
you all the supplies we can spare.

uss rose to his feet. That, he said, calls for a little drink.

e opened a cabinet and took out bottles and glasses.

Only three, said hambers. raven doesn't drink.

raven interrupted. our one for me, too, age.

hambers looked at the scientist, astounded. I never knew you to take a
drink in your life.

raven twisted his face into a grin. This is a special occasion.

                                   

The Invincible was nearing Mars, heading for arth, which was still a
greenish sphere far to one side of the flaming Sun.

uss watched the little green globe, thinking.

arth was home. To him it always would be home. But that would be
changed soon. ust a few more generations, and, to millions upon
millions of human beings, arth no longer would be home.

With the new material energy engines, life on every planet would be
possible now, even easy. The cost of manufacture, mining, shipping
across the vast distances between the planets would be only a fraction
of what it had been when man had been forced to rely upon the unwieldy,
epensive accumulator system of supplying life-giving power.

Now Mars would have power of her own. ven luto could generate her own.
And power was ... well, it was power. The power to live, the power to
work, to establish and maintain commerce, to adust gravity to arth
standard or to any standard. The power to remake and reshape and rebuild
planetary conditions to suit man eactly.

arthmen and arthwomen would be moving out en masse now to the new and
virgin fields of endeavor--to the farms of enus, to the manufacturing
centers that were springing up on Mars, to the mines of the ovian
worlds, to the great laboratory plants that would spring up on Titan and
on luto and on the other colder worlds.

The migration of races had started long ago. In the Old Stone Age, the
ro-Magnon had swept out of nowhere to oust the Neanderthal. enturies
later the barbarians of the north, in another of those restless
migrations, had overwhelmed and swept away the oman mpire. And many
centuries later, migration had turned from urope to a new world across
the sea, and fighting Americans had battled their way from east to west,
conquering a continent.

And now another great migration was on--man was leaving the arth,
moving into space. e was leaving behind him the world that had reared
and fostered him. e was striking out and out. First the planets would
be overrun, and then man would leap from the planets to the stars!

                                   

For years after America had become a country, had built a tradition of
her own, urope was regarded by millions as the homeland. But as the
years swept by, this had ceased to be and the Americas were a world unto
themselves, owing nothing to urope.

And that was the way it would be with arth. For centuries, for
thousands of years, arth would be the Mother lanet, the homeland for
all the millions of roaming men and women who dared the gulfs of space
and the strangeness of new worlds. There would be trips back to the
arth for sentimental reasons ... to see the place where one's ancestors
were born and had lived, to goggle at the monument which marked the
point from which the first spaceship had taken off for the Moon, to
visit old museums and see old cities and breathe the air that men and
women had breathed for thousands of years before they found the power to
take them anywhere.

In the end, arth would be ust a worn-out planet. ven now her
minerals were rapidly being ehausted; her oil wells were dry and all
her coal was mined; her industry stabilized and filled; her businesses
interlocking and highly competitive. A world that was too full, that had
too many things, too many activities, too many people. A world that
didn't need men and women. A world where even genius was kept from
rising to the top.

And this was what was driving mankind away from the arth. The
competition, the crowded conditions, in business and industrial fields,
the lack of opportunity for new development, the everlasting struggle to
get ahead, fighting for a place to live when millions of others were
fighting for the same thing. But not entirely that, not that alone.
There was something else--that old adventuresome spirit, the driving
urge to face new dangers, to step over old frontiers, to do and dare, to
make a damn fool of one's self, or to surpass the greatest
accomplishments of history.

But arth would never die, for there was a part of arth in every man
and woman who would go forth into space, part of arth's courage, part
of arth's ideals, part of arth's dreams. The habits and the virtues
and the faults that arth had spawned and fostered ... these were things
that would never die. Old arth would live forever. ven when she was
drifting dust and the Sun was a dead, cold star, arth would live on in
the courage and the dreams that by that time would be spreading to the
far corners of the alay.

uss dug the pipe out of his pocket, searched for the pouch, found it on
the desk behind him. It was empty.

ell, he said, my tobacco's all gone.

reg grinned. ou won't have to wait long. We'll be back on arth in a
few more hours.

uss put the stem between his teeth, bit down on it savagely. I guess
that's right. I can dry smoke her until we get there.

arth was larger now. Mars had swung astern.

Suddenly a winking light stabbed out into space from the night side of
arth. Signaling ... signaling ... clearing the spacelanes for a greater
future than any human prophet had ever predicted.


The nd





nd of the roect utenberg Book of mpire, by lifford Donald Simak

 ND OF TIS OT TNB BOO MI 

 This file should be named .tt or .zip 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http:www.gutenberg.org

roduced by reg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed roofreading Team at http:www.pgdp.net


pdated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

reating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a nited States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
and you! can copy and distribute it in the nited States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the eneral Terms of se part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing roect utenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the OT TNB-tm concept and trademark.  roect
utenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  ou may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANTIN with public domain eBooks.  edistribution is
subect to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



 STAT: F INS 

T F OT TNB INS
AS AD TIS BFO O DISTIBT O S TIS WO

To protect the roect utenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
or any other work associated in any way with the phrase roect
utenberg, you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full roect
utenberg-tm icense available with this file or online at
http:gutenberg.netlicense.


Section .  eneral Terms of se and edistributing roect utenberg-tm
electronic works

.A.  By reading or using any part of this roect utenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
trademarkcopyright agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of roect utenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a roect
utenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph ...

.B.  roect utenberg is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most roect utenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph . below.  There are a lot of things you can do with roect
utenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to roect utenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph . below.

..  The roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation the Foundation
or AF, owns a compilation copyright in the collection of roect
utenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the nited States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the nited States and you are
located in the nited States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to roect utenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the roect
utenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing roect utenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the roect utenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  ou can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full roect
utenberg-tm icense when you share it without charge with others.

.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  opyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the nited States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other roect
utenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the nited
States.

..  nless you have removed all references to roect utenberg:

...  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full roect utenberg-tm icense must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a roect utenberg-tm work any work on which the
phrase roect utenberg appears, or with which the phrase roect
utenberg is associated is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  ou may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the roect utenberg icense included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

...  If an individual roect utenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder, the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the nited States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase roect utenberg associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs ..
through .. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
roect utenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .. or
...

...  If an individual roect utenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .. through .. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the roect utenberg-tm icense for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

...  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full roect utenberg-tm
icense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with roect utenberg-tm.

...  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the roect
utenberg-tm icense.

...  ou may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertet form.  owever, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a roect utenberg-tm work in a format other than
lain anilla ASII or other format used in the official version
posted on the official roect utenberg-tm web site www.gutenberg.net,
you must, at no additional cost, fee or epense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of eporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original lain anilla ASII or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full roect utenberg-tm
icense as specified in paragraph ...

...  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any roect utenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .. or ...

...  ou may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing roect utenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- ou pay a royalty fee of  of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of roect utenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the roect utenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation.  oyalty payments
     must be paid within  days following each date on which you
     prepare or are legally required to prepare your periodic ta
     returns.  oyalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section , Information about donations to
     the roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation.

- ou provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing or by e-mail within  days of receipt that she
     does not agree to the terms of the full roect utenberg-tm
     icense.  ou must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     roect utenberg-tm works.

- ou provide, in accordance with paragraph .F., a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
     of receipt of the work.

- ou comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of roect utenberg-tm works.

...  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a roect utenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation and Michael
art, the owner of the roect utenberg-tm trademark.  ontact the
Foundation as set forth in Section  below.

.F.

.F..  roect utenberg volunteers and employees epend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the roect utenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, roect utenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

.F..  IMITD WAANT, DISAIM OF DAMAS - cept for the ight
of eplacement or efund described in paragraph .F., the roect
utenberg iterary Archive Foundation, the owner of the roect
utenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a roect
utenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and epenses, including legal
fees.  O A TAT O A NO MDIS FO NIN, STIT
IABIIT, BA OF WAANT O BA OF ONTAT T TOS
OIDD IN AAA F.  O A TAT T FONDATION, T
TADMA OWN, AND AN DISTIBTO ND TIS AMNT WI NOT B
IAB TO O FO ATA, DIT, INDIT, ONSNTIA, NITI O
INIDNTA DAMAS N IF O I NOTI OF T OSSIBIIT OF S
DAMA.

.F..  IMITD IT OF AMNT O FND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money if any you paid for it by sending a
written eplanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written eplanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fi the problem.

.F..  cept for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .F., this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WIT NO OT
WAANTIS OF AN IND, SS O IMID, INDIN BT NOT IMITD TO
WAANTIS OF MANTIBIIT O FITNSS FO AN OS.

.F..  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the eclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maimum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

.F..  INDMNIT - ou agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of roect utenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of roect utenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and epenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: a distribution of this or any roect utenberg-tm
work, b alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
roect utenberg-tm work, and c any Defect you cause.


Section  .  Information about the Mission of roect utenberg-tm

roect utenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It eists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

olunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching roect utenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the roect utenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In , the roect
utenberg iterary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for roect utenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections  and 
and the Foundation web page at http:www.pglaf.org.


Section .  Information about the roect utenberg iterary Archive
Foundation

The roect utenberg iterary Archive Foundation is a non profit
c educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted ta eempt status by the Internal
evenue Service.  The Foundation's IN or federal ta identification
number is -.  Its c letter is posted at
http:pglaf.orgfundraising.  ontributions to the roect utenberg
iterary Archive Foundation are ta deductible to the full etent
permitted by .S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at  Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, A, ., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
 North  West, Salt ake ity, T ,  -, email
businesspglaf.org.  mail contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http:pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. regory B. Newby
     hief ecutive and Director
     gbnewbypglaf.org


Section .  Information about Donations to the roect utenberg
iterary Archive Foundation

roect utenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
 to , are particularly important to maintaining ta eempt
status with the IS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all  states of the nited
States.  ompliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http:pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning ta treatment of donations received from
outside the nited States.  .S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

lease check the roect utenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http:pglaf.orgdonate


Section .  eneral Information About roect utenberg-tm electronic
works.

rofessor Michael S. art is the originator of the roect utenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed roect
utenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


roect utenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as ublic Domain in the .S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main  search facility:

     http:www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about roect utenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the roect utenberg iterary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
