he roect utenberg Book of he haring ross ystery, by . . letcher

his eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited tates and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  ou may copy it, give it away or reuse it under the terms of
the roect utenberg icense included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the nited tates, youll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

itle he haring ross ystery

Author . . letcher

elease ate uly ,  Book 

anguage nglish

haracter set encoding 

 A O I O B BOO  AI O  




roduced by Al aines









 AI O 


B

. . 



B I II

 O , OO, .W.




A B I BOO



ixth printing completing , copies



rinted in reat Britain by Butler  anner td., rome and ondon




O


A

     I.   A AI A
    II.  WO OAI I I
   III.   OIA O
    I.   IAO A
     .   OI 
    I.  A O I
   II.  BA 
  III.  IWOO 
    I.   II BO
     .   IO  IIO
    I.  A IA
   II.  AIA AA IO
  III.  WO WA 
   I.  I I BAAI
    .  AIO
   I.  I O
  II.   O AB
 III.   A
   I.   OO OA
    .  OI A
   I.   O I WII
  II.   IAB OIIO
 III.   AA O I I 
  I.   O I  A
   .  A
  I.  WAOO
 II.   AA




 AI O 


A I

 A AI A

etherwick had dined that evening with friends who lived in adogan
ardens, and had stayed so late in conversation with his host that
midnight had come before he left and set out for his bachelor chambers
in the emple it was, indeed, by the fraction of a second that he
caught the last eastbound train at loane quare.  he train was
almost destitute of passengers the car which he himself entered, a
firstclass smoking compartment, was otherwise empty no one came into
it when the train reached ictoria.  But at t. amess ark two men
got in, and seated themselves opposite to etherwick.

ow etherwick was a young barrister, going in for criminal practice,
in whom the observant faculty was deeply implanted it was natural to
him to watch and to speculate on anything he saw.  Because of this, and
perhaps because he had ust then nothing else to think about, he sat
observing the newcomers he found interest, amusement, and not a
little profit in this sort of thing, and in trying to decide whether a
given man was this, that, or something else.

Of the two men thus under inspection, the elder was a big, burly,
freshcoloured man of apparently sixty to sixtyfive years of age.  is
closely cropped silvery hair, his smartly trained grey moustache, his
keen blue eyes and generally alert and vivacious appearance, made
etherwick think that he was or had been in some way or other connected
with the army this impression was heightened by an erect carriage,
squareset shoulders and something that suggested a long and close
acquaintance with the methods of the drillyard and the parade ground.
erhaps, thought etherwick, he was a retired noncommissioned officer,
a regimental sergeantmaor, or something of that sort this idea,
again, was strengthened by the fact that the man carried a handsome
walkingcane, the head of which, either of gold or of silvergilt, was
fashioned like a crown.  here was something military, too, about the
cut of his clothes he was a smartly dressed man, from his silk hat,
new and glossy and worn a little rakishly on the right side of his
head, to his highly polished boots.  A wellpreserved, cheerylooking,
goodhumoured sort of person, this, decided etherwick, and apparently
well satisfied with himself and full of the enoyment of life, and
likely, from all outward sight, to make old bones.

he other man came into a different category.  he difference began
with his clothes, which, if not exactly shabby, were semishabby, much
worn, illkept and badly put on he was evidently a careless man, who
scorned a clothesbrush and was also indifferent to the very obvious
fact that his linen was frayed and dirty.  e was a thin, meagre man,
of not onehalf the respectable, wellfed bulk of his companion his
sallowcomplexioned face was worn, and his beard thin and irregular
altogether he suggested some degree of poor circumstances.  et, in
etherwicks opinion, he was a person of something beyond ordinary
mental capacity his eyes were large and intelligent, his nose was
wellshaped, his chin square and determined.  And his ungloved hands
were finely moulded and delicate of proportion the fingers were long,
thin and tapering.  etherwick noticed two facts about those fingers
the first, that they were restless the second, that they were much
stained, as if the man had recently been mixing dyes or using
chemicals.  And then he suddenly observed that the big mans hands and
fingers were similarly stainedblue and red and yellow, in patches.

hese men were talking when they entered the compartment they
continued to talk as they settled down.  etherwick could not avoid
hearing what they said.

"ueerest experience Ive ever had in my time" the big man was saying
as he dropped into a corner seat.  "ell you, I knew her the instant I
clapped eyes on that portrait  Afterhow many years will it be, now
en, I thinkyes, ten.  Oh, yes  new her well enough.  When we get
to my hotel, Ill show you the portraitI cut it out and put it
asideand youll identify it as quick as I didlay you aught you like
on it  o mistaking that"

his was said in a broad orth ountry accent, in full keeping, thought
etherwick, with the burly frame of the speaker.  But the other man
replied in tones that suggested the born ondoner.

"I think I shall be able to recognise it," he said softly.  "Ive a
very clear recollection of the lady, though, to be sure, I only saw her
once or twice."

"Aye, well, a finelooking womanand a beautylike thats not soon
forgotten," declared the other.  "And nowadays the years dont seem to
make much difference to a womans age.  Anyway, I knew herhats
you, my fine madam, says I to myself, as soon as ever I unfolded that
paper.  But, mind you, I kept it to myself  ot a word to my
granddaughter, though she was sitting opposite to me when I made the
discovery.  onot to anybodytill tonight.  ot the sort of thing
to blab aboutthat"

"ust so," said the smaller man.  "Of course, youd remember that I was
likely to have some recollection of her and of the circumstances.
Oddvery.  And I suppose the next thing iswhat are you going to do
about it"

"Oh, well" replied the big man.  "Of course, ten years have elapsed.
But as to that, it wouldnt matter, you know, if twenty years had
slipped by.  till"

At that point he sank his voice to the least of a whisper, bending over
to his companion, and etherwick heard no more.  But it seemed to him
that the little man, although he appeared to be listening intently,
was, in reality, doing nothing of the sort.  is long, stained fingers
became more restless than ever twice, before the train came to
Westminster, he pulled out his watch and glanced at it once, after
that, etherwick caught the nervous hand again shaking towards the
waistcoat pocket.  And he got an idea that the man was regarding his
big, garrulous companion with curiously furtive glances, as if he were
waiting for some vague, yet expected thing, and wondering when it would
materialise there was a covert watchfulness about him, and though he
nodded his head from time to time as if in assent to what was being
whispered to him, etherwick became convinced that he was either
abstracted in thought or taking no interest.  If eyes and fingers were
to be taken as indications, the mans thoughts were elsewhere.

he train pulled up at Westminster, lingered its halfminute, moved
onward again the big man, still bending down to his companion, went on
whispering now and then, as if he were telling a good story or making
a clever point, he chuckled.  But suddenly, and without any warning, he
paused, coming to a dead, sharpcut stop in an apparently easy flow of
language.  e stared wildly around him etherwick caught the flash of
his eye as it swept the compartment, and never forgot the look of
frightened amazement that he saw in it it was as if the man had been
caught, with lightninglike swiftness, face to face with some awful
thing.  is left hand shut up, clutching at his breast and throat the
other, releasing the goldheaded cane, shot out as if to ward off a
blow.  It dropped like lead at his side the other arm relaxed and
fell, limp and nerveless, and before etherwick could move, the big,
burly figure sank back in its corner and the eyes closed.

etherwick umped from his seat, shouting to the other man.

"our friend" he cried.  "ook"

But the other man was looking.  e, too, had got to his feet, and he
was bending down and stretching out a hand to the big mans wrist.  e
muttered something that etherwick failed to catch.

"What do you say" demanded etherwick impatiently.  "ood heavenswe
must do something  he manswhat is it  A seizure"

"A seizure" answered the other.  "esthats ita seizure  ed had
oneslight giddinessust before we got in.  Athe trains stopping,
though.  haring ross  II know a doctor close by."

he train was already pulling up.  etherwick flung open the dividing
door between his compartment and the nexthe had seen the conductor
down there and he beckoned to him.

"uick" he called.  "eretheres a man illdying, I think  ome
here"

he conductor cameslowly.  But when he saw the man in the corner, he
made for the outer door and beckoned to men on the platform.  A
uniformed official ran up and got in.

"What is it" he asked.  "entleman in a fit  Whos with him
Anybody"

etherwick looked round for the man with the stained fingers.  But he
was already out of the carriage and on the platform and making for the
stairs that led to the exit.  e flung back a few words, pointing
upward at the same time.

"octorclose by" he shouted.  "Back in five minutesget him out."

But already there was a doctor at hand.  Before the man with the
stained fingers had fairly vanished, other men had come in from the
adoining compartments one pushed his way to the front.

"I am a medical man," he said curtly.  "ake way, please."

he other men stood silently watching while the newcomer made a hasty
examination of the still figure.  e turned sharply.

"his mans dead" he said in quick, matteroffact tones.  "Is anyone
with him"

he train officials glanced at etherwick.  But etherwick shook his
head.

"I dont know him," he answered.  "here was another man with himthey
got in together at t. amess ark.  ou saw the other man," he
continued, turning to the conductor.  "e umped out as you came in
here, and ran up the stairs, saying that he was going for some doctor,
close by."

"I saw himheard him, too," assented the conductor.  e glanced at the
stairs and the exit beyond.  "But he aint come back," he added.

"ou had better get the man out," said the doctor.  "Bring him in to
some place on the platform."

A station policeman had come up by that time he and the railwaymen
lifted the dead man and carried him across the platform to a
waitingroom.  etherwick, feeling that he would be wanted, followed in
the rear, the doctor with him.  It struck etherwick with grim irony
that as soon as they were off it, the train went on, as if careless and
indifferent.

"ood heavens" he muttered, more to himself than to the man at his
side.  "hat poor fellow was alive, and, as far as I could see, in the
very best of health and spirits, five minutes ago"

"o doubt" observed the doctor dryly.  "But hes dead now.  What
happened"

etherwick told him briefly.

"And the other mansgone" remarked the doctor.  "m  But I suppose
nobody thought of detaining him.  owif he doesnt come backeh"

"ou dont suspect foul play" exclaimed etherwick.

"he circumstances are odd," said his companion.  "I should say the man
ust died  ied as suddenly as man can dieas if hed been shot dead
or literally blown to fragments.  hats from what you tell me, you
know.  And it may bea case of poisoning.  Will that other man come
back  If not"

By that time etherwick was beginning to wonder if the other man would
come back.  e had not come at the end of ten minutes nor of fifteen
nor of thirty.  But other men had come, hurrying into the drabwalled
waitingroom and gathering about the table on which the dead man had
been laid.  hey were mostly officials and police, and presently a
police surgeon arrived and with him a police inspector, one
atherfield, who knew etherwick.  While the two doctors made another
examination, this man drew etherwick aside.  etherwick retold his
story this time with full details.  atherfield listened and shook his
head.

"hat second man wont come back" he said.  "one half an hour now.
o you think he knew the man was dead before he cleared out"

"I cant say," replied etherwick.  "he whole thing was so quick that
it was all over before I could realise what was happening.  I certainly
saw the other man give the dead man a quick, close inspection.  hen he
literally umped for the doorhe was out of it and running up the
stairs before the train had come to a definite stop."

"ou can describe him, r. etherwick" suggested the inspector.

"escribe himyes.  And identify him, too," asserted etherwick.  "e
was a man of certain notable features.  I should know him again,
anywhere."

"Well, well have to look for him," said atherfield.  "And now well
have to take this dead man to the mortuary and have a thorough
examination and see what hes got on him.  oud better come, r.
etherwickin fact, I shall want you."

etherwick wentin the tail of a sombre procession, himself and the
two medical men walking together.  e had to tell his tale again, to
the police surgeon that functionary, like all the rest who had heard
the story, shook his head ominously over the disappearance of the
sallowfaced man.

"All an excuse, that," he said.  "heres no doctor close by.  ou
didnt get any ideafrom their conversation, I meanof the dead mans
identity  Any name mentioned"

"I heard no name mentioned," answered etherwick.  "hey didnt address
each other by name.  Ive no idea who the man is."

hat was what he wanted to know.  omewhere, of course, this dead man
had friends.  e had spoken of his hotelthere, perhaps, somebody was
awaiting his coming somebody to whom the news of his death would come
as a great shock, perhaps, and terrible trouble.  And he waited with a
feeling that was little short of personal anxiety while the police
searched the dead mans pockets.

he various articles which were presently laid out on a sidetable were
many.  here was a purse, well stocked with money there was loose
money in the pockets.  here was a handsome gold watch and a heavy
chain and locket.  here was a pocketbook, stuffed with letters and
papers.  And there were all the things that a wellprovided man
carriesa cigarcase, a silver matchbox, a silver pencilcase, a
penknife, and so on clearly, the dead man had been in comfortable
circumstances.  But the articles of value were brushed aside by the
inspector his immediate concern was with the contents of the
pocketbook, from which he hastened to take out the letters.  A second
later he turned to etherwick and the two doctors, nodding his head
sidewise at the still figure on the table.

"hisll be the name and address," he said, pointing to the envelopes
in his hand.  "r. obert annaford, alters rivate otel, urrey
treet, trand.  everal letters, you see, addressed there, and all of
recent date.  Well have to go therethere may be his wife and people
of his there.  Wonder who he wassomebody from the provinces, most
likely.  Well"

e laid down the letters and picked up the watcha fine goldcased
hunterand released the back.  Within that was an inscription,
engraved in delicate lettering.  he inspector let out an exclamation.

"Ah" he said.  "I half suspected that from his appearance.  One of
ourselves  ook at thisresented to uperintendent obert
annaford, on his retirement, by the agistrates of ellithwaite.
ellithwaite, ehwheres that, now"

"orkshire," replied one of the men standing close by.  "outhWest
iding."

atherfield closed the watch and laid it by.

"Well," he remarked, "thats evidently who he isexuperintendent
annaford, of ellithwaite, orkshire, stopping at alters otel.
Ill have to go round there.  r. etherwick, as you were the last man
to see him alive, I wish youd go with meits on your way to the
emple."

omething closely corresponding to curiosity, not morbid, but
compelling, made etherwick accede to this request.  resently he and
atherfield walked along the mbankment together, talking of what had
ust happened and speculating on the cause of annafords sudden death.

"We may know the exact reason by noon," remarked atherfield.
"herell be a postmortem, of course.  But that other manwe may get
to know something about him here.  And I wonder whom we shall find
here  ope its not his wife...."




A II

WO OAI I I

alter himself opened the door of his small private hotel a quiet,
reserved man who looked like a retired butler.  e was the sort of man
who is slow of speech, and he had not replied to atherfields guarded
inquiry about r. obert annaford when a door in the little hall
opened, and a girl appeared, who, hearing the inspectors question,
immediately came forward as if in answer.

etherwick recognised this girl.  e had seen her only the previous
afternoon in ountain ourt, in company with a man whom he knew
slightlyenthwaite, a fellowbarrister.  enthwaite, evidently, was
doing the honoursshowing her round the emple etherwick, in fact,
in passing them, had overheard enthwaite telling his companion
something of the history of the old houses and courts around them.  And
the girl had attracted him then.  he was a pretty girl, tall, slim,
graceful, and in addition to her undoubted charm of face and figure,
she looked to have more than an average share of character and
intelligence, and was listening to her guide with obvious interest and
appreciation.  etherwick had set her down as being, perhaps, a country
cousin of enthwaites, visiting ondon, maybe, for the first time.
Anyhow, in merely passing her and enthwaite he had noticed her so
closely that he now recognised her at once he saw, too, that she
recognised him.  But there was another matter more pressing than
thatand she had gone straight to it.

"Are these gentlemen asking for my grandfather" she inquired, coming
still nearer and glancing from the hotel proprietor to the two callers.
"es not come in"

etherwick was glad to hear that the dead man was the girls
grandfather.  ertainly it was a close relationship, but, after all,
not so close as it might have been.  And he was conscious that the
inspector was relieved, too.

"Were asking about r. obert annaford," he said.  "Is he your
grandfatherexuperintendent annaford, of ellithwaite  ust
sowell, Im very sorry to bring bad news about him"

e broke off, watching the girl keenly, as if he wanted to make sure
that she would take the news quietly.  And evidently reassured on that
point, he suddenly went on definitely

"oull understand" he said.  "Itswell, the worst news.  he fact
is"

"Is my grandfather dead" interrupted the girl.  "If thats it, please
say soI shant faint, or anything of that sort.  ButI want to know"

"Im sorry to say he is dead," replied atherfield.  "e died suddenly
in the train at haring ross.  A seizure, no doubt.  Was he well when
you saw him last"

he girl turned to the hotel proprietor, who was standing by, evidently
amazed.

"ever saw a gentleman look better or seem better in my life than he
did when he went out of that door at halfpast six oclock" he
exclaimed.  "Best of health and spirits"

"y grandfather was quite well," said the girl quietly.  "I never
remember him being anything else but wellhe was a very strong,
vigorous man.  Will you please tell me all about it"

atherfield told all about it, turning now and then to etherwick for
corroboration.  In the end he put a question.

"his man that r. etherwick saw in your grandfathers company" he
suggested.  "o you recognise anyone from that description"

"ono one," answered the girl.  "But my grandfather knew people in
ondon whom I dont know.  e has been going about a good deal since we
came here, three days agolooking out for a house."

"Well, we shall have to find that man," remarked atherfield.  "Of
course, if youd recognised the description as that of somebody known
to you"

"o," she said again.  "I know nobody like that.  But nowdo you wish
me to go with youto him"

"Its not necessaryI wouldnt tonight, if I were you," replied
atherfield.  "Ill call again in the morning.  eanwhile, leave
matters to us and the doctors.  ouve friends in ondon, I suppose"

"es, we have friendsrelations, in fact," said the girl.  "I must let
them know at once."

atherfield nodded and turned to the door.  But etherwick lingered.
e and the girl were looking at each other.  e suddenly spoke.

"I saw you this afternoon," he said, "in ountain ourt, with a man
whom I know slightly, r. enthwaite.  Is he, by any chance, one of the
relations you mentioned ust now  Because, if so, he lives close by
me.  I can tell him, if you wish."

"o," she answered, "not a relative.  We know him.  ou might tell him,
if you please, and if its no trouble."

"o trouble at all," said etherwick.  "Andif I mayI hope youll
let me call in the morning to hear if theres anything I can do for
you"

he girl gave him a quick, responsive glance.

"hats very kind of you," she said.  "es."

etherwick and the police inspector left the little hotel and walked up
the street.  atherfield seemed to be in a brown study.  omewhere up
in the trand and farther away down leet treet the clocks began
striking.

"eems to me," exclaimed atherfield suddenly, "seems to me, r.
etherwick, this ismurder"

"ou mean poison" said etherwick.

"ikely  Why, yes, of course, it would be poison.  We must have that
man  ou cant add to your description of him"

"ouve already got everything that I can tell.  retty full and
accurate, too.  I should say you oughtnt to have much difficulty in
laying hands on himfrom my description."

atherfield made a sound that was half a laugh and half a groan.

"ord bless you" he said.  "Its like seeking a needle in a bundle of
hay, searching for a given man in ondon  I mean, of course,
sometimes.  ore often than not, in fact.  eres this chap rushes up
the stairs at haring ross, vanisheswhere  One man amongst seven
millions of men and women  owever"

hen they parted, and etherwick, full of thought, went home to his
chambers and to bed, and lay equally thoughtful for a long time before
he went to sleep.  e made a poor night of it, but soon after eight
oclock he was in enthwaites chambers.  enthwaite was dressing and
breakfasting at the same timea readypacked brief bag and an open
timetable suggested that he was in a hurry to catch a train.  But he
suspended his operations to stare, openmouthed, wideeyed at
etherwicks news.

"annaforddead" he exclaimed.  "reat cottwhy, he was as fit as
a fiddle at noon yesterday, etherwick  e and his grand daughter
called on me, and I took em to lunchI come from ellithwaite, you
know, so of course I knew them.  annaford had to go as soon as wed
lunchedsome appointmentso I showed the girl round a bit.  ice
girl, thatclever.  ame of hona.  Worth cultivating.  And the old
mans dead  Bless me"

"I dont think theres much doubt about foul play," observed etherwick.

"ooks uncommonly like it," said enthwaite.  e went on with his
double task.  "Well," he added, "sorry, but I cant be of any use to
iss annaford todaygot to go down to a beastly uarter essions
case, my boy, and precious little time to catch my train.  But
tomorrowperhaps you can give m a hand this morning"

"es," answered etherwick.  "Im doing nothing.  Ill go round there
after a while.  Im interested naturally.  Its a queer case."

"ueer  eems so, rather," assented enthwaite.  "Wellgive iss
annaford my sympathy and all that, and tell her that if theres
anything I can do when I get backyou know what to say."

"he said shed relations here in ondon," remarked etherwick.

"ousinsauntssomething or otherover ooting way, I think," agreed
enthwaite.  "wenty past eightetherwick, Ill have to rush for it"

e swallowed the last of his coffee, seized the bag and darted away
etherwick went back to his own chambers and breakfasted leisurely.
And all the time he sat there he was pondering over the event of the
previous midnight, and especially upon the sudden disappearance of the
man with the stained fingers.  o etherwick that disappearance seemed
to argue guilt.  e figured it in this waythe man who ran away at
haring ross had poisoned this other man in some clever and subtle
fashion, by means of something which took a certain time to take
effect, and, when that time arrived, did its work with amazing
swiftness.  etherwick, in his war service, had seen men die more times
than he cared to remember.  e had seen some men shot through the
brain he had seen others shot through the heart.  But he had never
seen any of these mensome of them shot at his very sidedie with the
extraordinary quickness with which annaford had died.  And he came to
a conclusion if the man with the stained fingers had poisoned
annaford, then he was somebody who had a rare and a profound knowledge
of poisons.

e went round to urrey treet at ten oclock.  iss annaford, said
the hotel proprietor, had gone with her aunt, a rs. eeley, who had
come early that morning, to see her grandfathers dead bodysome
police official had fetched them.  But she had left a message for
anyone who calledthat she would not be long away.  And etherwick
waited in the little dingy coffeeroom there were certain questions
that he wanted to put to hona annaford, also he wanted to give her
certain information.

"ery sad case this, sir," observed the hotel proprietor, hovering
about his breakfasttables.  "ruel end for a fine healthy gentleman
like r. annaford"

"ery sad," agreed etherwick.  "ou said last nightor, rather, this
morningthat r. annaford was in good health and spirits when he went
out early in the evening"

"he best, sir  e was a cheery, affable gentlemanfond of his oke.
oked and laughed with me as I opened the door for himnever thinking,
sir, as I should never see him again alive"

"ou dont know where he was going"

"I dont, sir.  And his granddaughterclever young lady, that,
sirshe dont know, neither.  he went to a theatre, along of her
aunt, the lady that came early this morning.  We wired the bad news to
her first thing, and she came along at once.  But himno, I dont know
where he went to spend his evening.  Been in and out, and mostly out,
ever since they were here, three days ago.  ousehunting, so I
understood."

hona annaford presently returned, in company with a motherlylooking
woman whom she introduced as her aunt, rs. eeley.  hen etherwick
remembered that he had not introduced himself rectifying that
omission, he found that enthwaite had told hona who he was when he
passed them the previous afternoon.  e delivered enthwaites message
and in his absence offered his own services.

"Its very good of you," said hona.  "I dont know that theres
anything to do.  he police seem to be doing everythingthe inspector
who was here last night was very kind ust now, but, as he said,
theres nothing to be done until after the inquest."

"es," said etherwick.  "And that isdid he say when"

"omorrow morning.  e said I should have to go," replied hona.

"o shall I," observed etherwick.  "heyll only want formal evidence
from you.  I shall have to say more.  I wish I could say more than I
shall have to say."

he two women glanced at him inquiringly.

"I mean," he continued, "that I wish I had stopped the other man from
leaving the train.  I suppose you have not heard anything from the
police about himthat man"

"othing.  hey had not found him or heard of him up to ust now.  But
you can tell me something that I very much want to know.  ou saw this
man with my grandfather for some little time, didnt you"

"rom t. amess ark to haring ross."

"id you overhear their conversation, or any of it"

"A good dealat first.  Afterwards, your grandfather began to whisper,
and I heard nothing of that.  But one reason I had for calling upon you
this morning was that I might tell you what I did overhear, and another
that I might ask you some questions arising out of what I heard.  r.
annaford was talking to this man, now missing, about some portrait or
photograph.  vidently it was of a lady whom he, your grandfather, had
known ten years ago whom the other man had also known.  our
grandfather said that when they got to his hotel he would show the
portrait to the other man who, he asserted, would be sure to recognise
it.  ow, had r. annaford said anything to you  o you know anything
about his bringing any friend of his to this hotel last night  And do
you know anything about any portrait or photograph such as that to
which he referred"

"About bringing anyone hereno  e never said anything to me about
it.  But about a photograph, or rather about a print of oneyes.  I do
know something about that."

"What" asked etherwick eagerly.

"Well, this," she answered.  "y grandfather, who, as I dare say you
know by this time, was for a good many years uperintendent of olice
at ellithwaite, had a habit of cutting things out of
newspapersparagraphs, accounts of criminal trials, and so on.  e had
several boxes full of such cuttings.  When we were coming to town the
other day I saw him cut a photograph out of some illustrated paper he
was reading in the train, and put it away in his pocketbookin a
pocketbook, I ought to say, for he had two or three pocketbooks.
his morning I was looking through various things which he had left
lying about on his dressingtable upstairs, and in one of his
pocketbooks I found the photograph which he cut out in the train.
hat must be the one you mentionits of a very handsome,
distinguishedlooking woman."

"If I may see it" suggested etherwick.

Within a couple of minutes he had the cutting in his handa scrap of
paper, neatly snipped out of its surrounding letterpress, which was a
print of a photograph of a woman of apparently thirtyfive to forty
years of age, evidently of high position, and certainly, as hona
annaford had remarked, of handsome and distinguished features.  But it
was not at the photograph that etherwick gazed with eyes into which
surmise and speculation were beginning to steal after a mere glance at
it, his attention fixed itself on some pencilled words on the margin at
its sides

"hrough my hands ten years ago"


"Is that your grandfathers writing" he inquired suddenly.

"es, thats his," replied hona.  "e had a habit of pencilling notes
and comments on his cuttingsall sorts of remarks."

"e didnt mention this particular cutting to you when he cut it out"

"ohe said nothing about it.  I saw him cut it out, and heard him
chuckle as he put it away, but he saidnothing."

"ou dont know who this lady is"

"Oh, no  ou see, theres no name beneath it.  I suppose there was in
the paper, but he cut out nothing but the picture and the bit of
margin.  But from what hes written there, I conclude that this is a
portrait of some woman who had been in trouble with the police at some
time or other."

"Obvious" muttered etherwick.  e sat silently inspecting the picture
for a minute or two.

"ook here," he said suddenly, "I want you to let me help in trying to
get at the bottom of thisnaturally you want to have it cleared up.
And to begin with, let me have this cutting, and for the present dont
tell anyoneI mean the police or any inquirersthat I have it.  Id
like to have a talk about it to enthwaite.  ou understand  As I was
present at your grandfathers death, Id like to solve the mystery of
it.  If youll leave this to me"

"Oh, yes" replied hona.  "Butyou think there has been foul
playthat he didnt die a natural deaththat it wasnt ust heart
failure or"

he door of the little coffeeroom was opened and atherfield looked
in.  eeing etherwick there, he beckoned him into the hall, closing
the door again as the young barrister oined him.  etherwick saw that
he was full of news, and instantly thought of the man with the stained
fingers.

"Well" he said eagerly, "laid your hands on that fellow"

"Oh, himno" answered atherfield.  "ot a word or sign of himso
far  But the doctors have finished their postmortem.  And theres no
doubt about their verdict.  oisoned"

atherfield sank his voice to a whisper as he spoke the last word.  And
etherwick, ready though he was for the news, started when he got
itthe definiteness of the announcement seemed like opening a window
upon a vista of obscured and misty distances.  e glanced at the door
behind him.

"Of course, theyll have to be told, in there," said atherfield,
interpreting his thoughts.  "But the things certain.  Our surgeon
suspected it from the first, and he got a ome Office specialist to
help at the autopsythey say the man was poisoned by some drug or
otherI dont understand these thingsthat had been administered to
him two or three hours before he died, and that when it did work,
worked with absolutely lightninglike effect."

"es," muttered etherwick thoughtfully.  "ightninglike effectgood
phrase.  I can testify that it did that"

atherfield laid a hand on the door.

"Well," he said, "Id better tell these ladies.  henthere are things
I want to know from the granddaughter.  Ive seen herand her
auntbefore this morning.  I found out that annaford brought up and
educated this girl, and that she lived with him in ellithwaite since
she left school, so shell know more about him than anybody.  And I
want to learn all I can.  ome in with me."




A III

 OIA O

lder and younger woman alike took atherfields intimation quietly.
hona made no remark.  But rs. eeley spoke impulsively.

"here never was a more popular man than he waswith everybody" she
exclaimed.  "Who should want to take his life"

"hats ust what weve got to find out, maam," said atherfield.
"And I want to know as much as I canI dare say iss annaford can
tell me a lot.  ow, lets see what we do know from what you told me
this morning.  r. annaford had been uperintendent of olice at
ellithwaite for some years.  e had recently retired on his pension.
e proposed to live in ondon, and you and he, iss annaford, came to
ondon to look for a suitable house, arrived three days ago, and put up
at this hotel.  hats all correct  ery goodnow then, let me hear
all about his movements during the last three days.  What did he do
Where did he spend his time"

"I cant tell you much," answered hona.  "e was out most of the day,
and generally by himself.  I was only out with him twiceonce when we
went to do some shopping, another time when we called on r. enthwaite
at his rooms in the emple.  I understood he was looking for a
houseseeing house agents and so on.  e was out morning, afternoon
and evening."

"id he never tell you anything about where hed been, or whom hed
seen"

"o.  e was the sort of man who keeps things to himself.  I have no
idea where he went nor whom he saw."

"idnt say anything about where he was going last night"

"o.  e only said that he was going out and that I should find him
here when I got back from the theatre, to which I was going with rs.
eeley.  We got back here soon after eleven.  But he hadnt come inas
you know."

"ou never heard him speak of having enemies"

"I should think he hadnt an enemy in the world  e was a very kind
man and very popular, even with the people he had to deal with as a
policesuperintendent."

"And I suppose hed no financial worriesanything of that sort  or
any other troublesnothing to bother him"

"I dont think hed a care in the world," said hona confidently.  "e
was looking forward with real zest to settling down in ondon.  And as
to financial worries, hed none.  e was well off."

"Always a saving, careful man," remarked rs. eeley.  "Oh, yes, quite
well offapart from his pension."

atherfield glanced at etherwick, who had listened carefully to all
that was asked and answered.  omething in the glance seemed to invite
him to take a hand.

"his occurs to me," said etherwick.  e turned to hona.  "Apart from
this househunting, do you know whether your grandfather had any
business affair in hand in ondon  What Im thinking of is thisfrom
what I saw of him in the train, he appeared to be an active, energetic
man, not the sort of man who, because hed retired, would sit down in
absolute idleness.  o you know of anything that he thought of
undertakingany business he thought of oining"

hona considered this question for a while.

"ot any business," she replied at last.  "But there is something that
may have to do with what you suggest.  y grandfather had a hobby.  e
experimented in his spare time."

"What in" asked etherwick.  hen he suddenly remembered the stained
fingers that he had noticed on the hands of both men the night before.
"Was it chemicals" he added quickly.

"es, in chemicals," she answered with a look of surprise.  "ow did
you know that"

"I noticed that his hands and fingers were stained," replied
etherwick.  "o were those of the man he was with.  Wellbut this
something"

"e had a little laboratory in our garden at ellithwaite," she
continued.  "e spent all his spare time in ithed done that for
years.  ately, I know, hed been trying to invent or discover
somethingI dont know what.  But ust before we left ellithwaite, he
told me that hed solved the problem, and when he was sorting out and
packing up his papers he showed me a sealed envelope in which he said
were the particulars of his big discoveryhe said there was a
potential fortune in it and that he should die a rich man.  I saw him
put that envelope in a pocketbook which he always carried with him."

"hat would be the pocketbook I examined last night," said
atherfield.  "here was no sealed envelope, nor one of which any seal
had been broken, in that.  here was nothing but letters, receipts and
unimportant papers."

"It is not in his other pocketbooks," declared hona.  "I went through
all his things myself very early this morningthrough everything that
he had here.  I know that he had that envelope yesterdayhe pulled out
some things from his pocket when we were lunching with r. enthwaite
in a restaurant in leet treet, and I saw the envelope.  It was a
stout, square envelope, across the front of which he had drawn two
thick red lines, and it was heavily sealed with black sealingwax at
the back."

"hat was yesterday, you say" asked atherfield sharply.  "esterday
noon  ust so  hen as he had it yesterday at noon, and as it wasnt
in his pockets last night and is not among his effects in this house,
its very clear that between, say, two oclock yesterday and midnight
he parted with it.  ow then, to whom  hats a thing weve ust got
to find out  But youre sure he wasnt oking when he told you that
this discovery, or invention, or whatever it was, was worth a potential
fortune"

"On the contrary, he was very serious," replied hona.  "nusually
serious for him.  e wouldnt tell me what it was, nor give me any
particularsall he said was that hed solved a problem and hit on a
discovery that hed worked over for years, and that the secret was in
that envelope and worth no end of money.  I asked him what he meant by
no end of money and he said Well, at any rate, a hundred thousand
poundsin time."

he two men exchanged glances silence fell on the whole group.

"Oh" said atherfield at last.  "A secret worth a hundred thousand
poundsin time.  his will have to be looked intonarrowly.  What do
you think, r. etherwick"

"es," answered etherwick.  "ouve no idea, of course, as to whether
your grandfather had done anything about putting this discovery on the
marketor made any arrangement about selling it  o  Well, can you
tell me this What sort of house did your grandfather want to rent here
in ondon  I mean, do you know what rent he was prepared to pay"

"I can answer that," remarked rs. eeley.  "e told me he wanted a
good housea real good onein a convenient suburb, and he was willing
to go up to three hundred a year."

"hree hundred a year," said etherwick.  e exchanged a meaning glance
with atherfield.  "hat," he added, "looks as if he felt assured of a
considerable income, and as though he had already realised on his
discovery or was very certain of doing so."

"o be sure," agreed atherfield.  "Of course, I dont know what his
private means were, but I know what his retiring pension would beand
three hundred a year for rent alone meansa good deal  mwell
have to endeavour to trace that sealed envelope."

"It seems to me, atherfield," observed etherwick, "that the first
thing to do is to trace annafords movements last night, from the time
he left this hotel until his death in the train."

"Were at that already," replied atherfield.  "Weve a small army of
men at work.  But as we want all the help we can get, Im going to stir
up the newspaper men, r. etherwickthe ress, sir, is always
valuable in this sort of thingand I want iss annaford, if shes
got one, to give me a recent photograph of her grandfather so that it
can appear in the papers.  omebody, you know, may recognise
itsomebody who saw him last night with somebody else."

hona had a new photograph of the dead man, taken in plain clothes ust
before he left ellithwaite, and she gave atherfield some copies of
it.  eproductions appeared in the eteor and other evening papers
that night, and in some of the dailies next morning.  And, as a result,
a man came forward at the inquest, a few hours later, who declared with
positive assurance that he had seen annaford early in the evening of
the murder.  is appearance was the only sensational thing about these
necessarily only preliminary proceedings before the coroner until he
stepped forward nothing had transpired with which etherwick was not
already familiar.  here had been his own evidence somewhat to his
surprise neither coroner nor police seemed to pay much attention to his
account of the conversation about the womans portrait they appeared
to regard annafords observations as a bit of garrulous reminiscence
about some criminal or other.  here had been honasa repetition of
what she had told atherfield and etherwick at alters otel police
and coroner evidently fixed on the missing sealed envelope and its
mysterious secret as a highly important factor in the case.  hen there
had been the expert testimony of the two doctors as to the cause of
deaththat had been confined to positive declarations that annaford
died from the administration of some subtle poison, the exact details
being left over until experts could tell more at the adourned
proceedings.  And the coroner was about to adourn for a fortnight when
a man, who had entered the court and been in conversation with the
officials, was put into the witnessbox to tell a story which certainly
added information and, at the same time, accentuated mystery.

his man was a highlyrespectable person in appearance, middleaged,
giving the name of artin harles edbitter, manager of an insurance
office in Westminster, and residing at utton, in urrey.  It was his
habit, he said, to travel every evening from ictoria to utton by the
. train.  As a rule he arrived at ictoria ust before seven and
took a cup of tea in the refreshmentroom.  e did this on the night
before last.  While he was drinking his tea at the counter, an elderly
man came in and stood by him, whom he was sure beyond doubt was the
same man whose photograph was reproduced in some of last nights and
some of this mornings newspapers.  e had no doubt whatever about
this.  e first noticed the mans stained fingers as he took up the
glass of whiskyandsoda which he had ordered he had, at the time,
wondered at the contrast between those fingers and the general
spickandspanness of the man and his smart attire also he had noticed
his goldheaded walkingcane and that the head was fashioned like a
crown.  hey stood side by side for some minutes, then the man went
out.  A minute or two later he saw him againthis time at the
righthand side bookstall he was there obviously looking out for
somebody.

his was the point where the interest really began everybody in court
strained eyes and ears as the coroner put a direct question.

"ooking out for somebody  id you see him meet anybody"

"I did"

"ell me what you saw."

"I saw this.  When I approached the bookstall, to buy some evening
papers, the man whom I had seen in the refreshmentroom was standing
close by.  e was looking about him, but chiefly at the entrances to
the big space between the offices and the platforms.  Once or twice he
looked at his watch.  It was thenby the station clockabout ten
minutes past seven.  e seemed impatient he moved restlessly about.  I
passed him and went to the bookstall.  When I turned round again he was
standing a few yards away, shaking hands with another man.  rom the
way in which they shook hands, I concluded that they were old friends,
who perhaps had not seen each other for some time."

"heir greeting was cordial"

"I should call it effusive."

"an you describe the other man"

"I can describe a sort of general impression of both.  e was a tall
man, taller than annaford, but not so broadly built.  e wore a dark
ulster overcoat, with a strap at the back it was either a very dark
blue or a black in colour.  e had a silk hatnew and glossy.  e gave
me the impression of being a smartlydressed mansmart boots and
gloves and that sort of thingyou know the general impression you get
at a quick glance.  But as to his features, I cant tell you anything."

"Why not" asked the coroner.

"Because, to begin with, he wore an unusually large pair of blue
spectacles, which completely veiled his eyes, and to end with, his
throat and chin were swathed in a heavy white muffler, which covered
the lower part of his face as well.  Between the rim of his hat and the
collar of his coat it was all muffler and spectacles"

he coroner looked disappointed.  is interest in the witness seemed to
evaporate.

"id you notice anything else" he asked.

"Only that the newcomer took annafords arm and that they walked away
towards the lefthand entrance hall, evidently in earnest conversation.
hat was the last I saw of them."

"heres ust one question I should like to put to you in conclusion,"
said the coroner.  "ou say that you are confident that the photograph
in the newspapers is that of the man you saw at ictoria.  ow, have
you seen the dead mans body"

"I have.  he police took me to see it when I volunteered my evidence."

"And you recognised it as that of the man you saw"

"Without doubt  here is no question of that in my mind."

ive minutes later the inquest stood adourned, and those chiefly
concerned gathered together in the emptying court to discuss the
voluntary witnesss evidence.  atherfield manifested an almost
cheerful optimism.

"his is bettermuch better," he declared, rubbing his hands as if in
anticipation of laying them on something.  "We know now that annaford
met, at any rate, two men that night.  Its easier to find two men than
one"

hona, whom etherwick had escorted to the coroners court, looked her
astonishment.  "ow can that be" she asked.

"r. etherwick understands," answered atherfield with a laugh.
"ell tell you."

But etherwick said nothing.  e was always wonderingalways
wonderingabout the woman whose picture lay in his pocket.




A I

 IAO A

he conviction that there was more than met the eye in annafords
cutting out and putting away the handsome and distinguished womans
photograph grew mightily in etherwicks mind during the next few days.
e recalled all that annaford had said about it in the train in those
few short minutes before his sudden death.  Why had he been so keen
about showing it to the other man  Was he taking the other man
specially to his hotel to show it to himat that time of night  Why
did the recollections which his possession of it brought up afford
himobviouslyso much interest and, it seemed, amusement  And what,
exactly, was meant by the pencilled words in the margin of the
cuttinghrough my hands ten years ago  nder what circumstances
had this woman been through annafords hands  And who was she  he
more he thought of it, the more etherwick was convinced that there was
more importance in this matter than the police attached to it.  hey
had proved utterly indifferent to etherwicks account of the
conversation in the trainthat, said atherfield, with official
superiority, was nothing but a bit of chat, reminiscence, recollection,
on the exsuperintendents part old men, he said, were fond of talking
about incidents of the past.  he only significance atherfield saw in
it was that it seemed to argue that whoever the man who had disappeared
was, he and annaford had known each other ten years ago.

At the end of a week the police had heard nothing of this man.  or had
they made any discovery in respect of the other man whom edbitter
swore he had seen with annaford at ictoria.  he best cotland ard
hands had been hard and continuously at work, and had brought nothing
to light.  Only one person had seen the first man after he darted up
the stairs of haring ross calling out that he was going for a doctor
this was a policeman on duty at the front of the nderground tation.
e had seen the man run out had watched him run at top speed up
illiers treet, and had thought no more of it than that he was some
belated passenger hurrying to catch a last bus in the trand.  But with
that, all news and trace of him vanished.  Of the tall man in the big
blue spectacles and white muffler there never was any trace, nor any
news beyond edbitters.  et edbitter was a thoroughly dependable
witness, and there was no doubt that he had seen annaford in this
mans company.  o, without question, annaford, during his last few
hours of life, had been with two menneither of whom could be found.
Within twentyfour hours of his death several men came forward
voluntarily who had had dealings or conversation with annaford since
his arrival in ondon.  But there was a significant fact about the news
which any of them could givenot one knew anything of the tall man
seen by edbitter, or of the shabby man seen by etherwick, or of the
secret which annaford carried in his sealed packet.  he story of that
sealed packet had been told plentifully in the newspapersbut nobody
came forward who knew anything about it.  And when a week had elapsed
after the exuperintendents burial, the whole mystery of his
undoubted murder seemed likely to become one of the many which are
never solved.

But etherwick was becoming absorbed in this affair into which he had
been so curiously thrown headfirst.  e had leisure on his hands
also, he was well off in this worlds goods, and much more concerned
with the psychology of his profession than with a desire to earn money
by its practice.  rom the moment in which he heard that the doctors
had found that annaford had been poisoned, he felt that here was a
murder mystery at the bottom of which he must getit fascinated him.
And all through his speculations and theorisings about it, he was
obsessed by the picture in his pocket.  Who was that womanand what
did the dead man remember about her

uddenly, one morning, after a visit from atherfield, who looked in at
his chambers casually, to tell him that the police had discovered
nothing, etherwick put on his hat and went round to urrey treet.  e
found hona annaford busy in preparing to leave alters otel she was
going to live, for a time at any rate, with rs. eeley.  etherwick
went straight to the matter that had brought him.

"hat print of a womans photograph which your grandfather had in his
pocketbook," he said, "and thats now in mine.  Out of what paper did
he cut ita newspaper, evidently."

"es, but I dont know what paper," answered hona.  "All I know is
that it was a paper which he got by post, the morning that he left
ellithwaite.  We were ust leaving for the station when the post came.
e put his letters and papersthere were several thingsin his
overcoat pocket, and opened them in the train.  It was somewhere on the
way to ondon that he cut out that picture.  e threw the paper
awaywith others.  e had a habit of buying a lot of papers, and used
to cut out paragraphs."

"WellI suppose it can be traced," muttered etherwick, thinking
aloud.  e glanced at the evidences of honas departure.  "o youre
going to live with your aunt" he said.

"or a timeyes," she answered.

"I hope youll let me call" suggested etherwick.  "Im awfully
interested in this affair, and I may be able to tell you something
about it."

"Wed be pleased," she replied.  "Ill give you the address.  I dont
intend to be idle thoughunless you call in the evening, youll
probably find me out."

"What are you thinking of doing" he asked.

"I think of going in for secretarial work," she answered.  "As a matter
of fact, I had a training for that, in ellithwaite.  ypewriting,
correspondence, accounts, rench, ermanIm pretty well equipped."

"ont think me inquisitive," said etherwick, suddenly.  "I hope your
grandfather hasnt forgotten you in his willI heard hed left one"

"hank you," replied hona.  "e hasnt.  e left me everything.  Ive
got about three hundred a yearrather more.  But thats no reason why
I should sit down, and do nothing, is it"

"ood" said etherwick.  "Butif that sealed packet could be found
What was worth a hundred thousand to him, would be worth a hundred
thousand to his sole legatee.  Worth finding"

"I wonder if anything will be found" she answered.  "he whole things
a mystery that Im not even on the edge of solving."

"ime" said etherwick.  "Andpatience."

e went away presently, and strolled round to Brick ourt, where
enthwaite had his chambers.

"oing anything" he asked, as he walked in.

"othing," replied enthwaite.  "o ahead"

etherwick sat down, and lighted his pipe.

"ou know ellithwaite, dont you" he asked when he had got his
tobacco well going.  "our town, eh"

"Born and bred there, and engaged to a girl there," replied enthwaite.
"Ought to  What about ellithwaite"

"Were you there ten years ago" demanded etherwick.

"en years ago  oexcept in the holidays.  I was at school ten years
ago.  Why"

"o you remember any police case at ellithwaite about that time in
which a very handsome woman was concernedprobably as defendant"

"o  But I was more interested in cricket than in crime, in those
days.  Are you thinking about the woman annaford spoke of in the train
to the chap they cant come across"

"I am  eems to me theres more in that than the police think."

"houldnt wonder.  ets see annaford spoke of that woman aswhat"

"aid shed been through his hands, ten years ago."

"Well, thats easy  If she was through annafords hands, as
uperintendent of olice, ten years ago, that would be at ellithwaite.
And therell be records, particulars, and so on at ellithwaite."

etherwick nodded, and smoked in silence for awhile.

"hink I shall go down there," he said at last.

enthwaite stared, wonderingly.

"een as all that" he exclaimed.

"ueer business" said etherwick.  "ike to solve it."

"Oh, well, its only a four hours run from ings ross," observed
enthwaite.  "Interesting town, too.  Old as the hills and modern as
they make em.  xcellent hotelWhite Bear.  And Ill tell you what,
my futures brother is a solicitor thereichael ollis.  Ill give
you a letter of introduction to him, and hell show you round and give
you any help you need."

"ood man" said etherwick.  "Write it"

enthwaite sat down and wrote, and handed over the result.

"What do you want to find out, exactly" he asked, as etherwick
thanked him, and rose to go.

"All about the woman, and why annaford cut her picture out of the
paper," answered etherwick.  "Wellsee you when I get back."

e went off to his own chambers, packed a bag, and drove to ings
ross to catch the early afternoon train for the orth.  At halfpast
seven that evening he found himself in ellithwaite, a grey,
smokeladen town set in the midst of bleak and rugged hills, where the
folkif the railway officials were anything to go byspoke a dialect
which, to etherwicks southern ears, sounded like some barbaric
language.  But the "White Bear," in which he was presently installed,
yielded all the comforts and luxuries of a firstclass hotel the
diningroom, into which etherwick turned as soon as he had booked his
room, seemed to be thronged by a thoroughly cosmopolitan crowd of men
he heard most of the principal uropean languages being spokenlater,
he found that his fellowguests were principally ontinental business
men, buyers, intent on replenishing exhausted stocks from the great
warehouses and manufactories of ellithwaite.  All this was
interesting, nor was he destined to spend the remainder of his evening
in contemplating it from a solitary corner, for he had scarcely eaten
his dinner when a hallporter came to tell him that r. ollis was
asking for r. etherwick.

etherwick hastened into the lounge, and found a keenfaced,
friendlyeyed man of forty or thereabouts stretching out a hand to him.

"enthwaite wired me this afternoon that you were coming down, and
asked me to look you up here," he said.  "Id have asked you to dine
with me, but Ive been kept at my office until ust now, and again, I
live a good many miles out of town.  But tomorrow night"

"oure awfully good," replied etherwick.  "Id no idea that
enthwaite was wiring.  e gave me a letter of introduction to you, but
I suppose he thought I wanted to lose no time.  And I dont, and I dare
say you can tell me something about the obect of my visitlets find
a corner and smoke."

Installed in an alcove in the big smokingroom, ollis read
enthwaites letter.

"What is it youre after" he asked.  "enthwaite mentions that my
knowledge of ellithwaite is deeper than his ownnaturally, it is, as
Im several years older."

"Well," responded etherwick.  "Its this, briefly.  oure aware, of
course, of what befell your late oliceuperintendent in ondonhis
sudden death"

"Oh, yesread all the newspapers, anyway," assented ollis.  "oure
the man who was present in the train on the nderground, arent you"

"I am.  And thats one reason why Im keen on solving the mystery.
heres no doubt whatever that annaford was poisonedthat its a case
of deliberate murder.  ow, theres a feature of the case to which the
police dont seem to attach any importance.  I do attach great
importance to it.  Its the matter of the woman to whom annaford
referred when he was talkingin my presenceto the man who so
mysteriously disappeared.  annaford spoke of that woman as having been
through his hands ten years ago.  hat would be some experience he had
here, in this town.  ow then, do you know anything about it  oes it
arouse any recollection"

ollis, who was smoking a cigar, thoughtfully tapped its long ash
against the edge of his coffeecup.  uddenly his eyes brightened.

"hats probably the Whittingham case," he said.  "It was about ten
years ago."

"And what was the Whittingham case" asked etherwick.  "ase of a
woman"

"Of a womanevidently an adventuresswho came to ellithwaite about
ten years ago, and stayed here some little time, in this very hotel,"
replied ollis.  "Oddly enough, I never saw her  But she was heard of
enougheventually.  he came here, to the White Bear, alone, with
plenty of luggage and evident funds.  I understand she was a very
handsome woman, twentyeight or thirty years of age, and she was taken
for somebody of consequence.  I rather think she described herself as
the onourable rs. Whittingham.  he paid her bills here with
unfailing punctuality every aturday morning.  he spent a good deal of
money amongst the leading tradesmen in the town, and always paid cash.
In short, she established her credit very successfully.  And with
nobody more so than the principal eweller herealladale.  he bought
a lot of ewellery from alladalebut in his case, she always paid by
cheque.  And in the end it was through a deal with alladale that she
got into trouble."

"And into annafords hands" suggested etherwick.

"Into annafords hands, certainly," assented ollis.  "It was this
way.  he had, as I said ust now, made a lot of purchases from
alladale, who, I may tell you, has a firstclass trade amongst our
rich commercial magnates in this neighbourhood.  er transactions with
him, however, were never, at first, in amounts exceeding a hundred or
two.  But they went through all right.  he used to pay him by cheque
drawn on a anchester bankanchester, you know, is only thirtyfive
miles away.  As her first cheques were always met, alladale never
bothered about making any inquiry about her financial stability like
everybody else he was very much impressed by her.  Well, in the end,
shed a big deal with alladale, alladale had a very fine diamond
necklace in stock.  e and she used to discuss her acquisition of it
according to his story they had a fine old battle as to terms.
ventually, they struck a bargainhe let her have it for three
thousand nine hundred pounds.  he gave him a cheque for that amount
there and then, and he let her carry off the necklace."

"Oh" exclaimed etherwick.

"ust so" agreed ollis.  "Buthe did.  owever, for some reason or
other, alladale had that cheque specially cleared.  he handed it to
him on a onday afternoon first thing on Wednesday morning alladale
found that it had been returned with the ominous reference to drawer
inscribed on its surface  aturally, he hurried round to the White
Bear.  But the onourable rs. Whittingham had disappeared.  he had
paid up her account, taken her belongings, and left the hotel, and the
town, late on the onday evening, and all that could be discovered at
the station was that she had travelled by the last train to eeds,
where, of course, there are several big main lines to all parts of
ngland.  And she had left no address she had, indeed, told the people
here that she should be back before long, and that if any letters came
they were to keep them until her return.  o then alladale went to the
police, and annaford got busy."

"I gather that he traced her" suggested etherwick.

ollis laughed sardonically.

"annaford traced herand he got her," he answered.  "But he might
well use the expression that you mentioned ust now.  he was indeed
through his handsust as a particularly slippery eel might have
beenshe got clear away from him."




A 

 OI 

etherwick now began to arrive at something like an understanding of a
matter that had puzzled him ever since and also at the time of the
conversation between annaford and his companion in the train.  e had
noted then that whatever it was that annaford was telling, he was
telling it as a man tells a story against himself there had been signs
of amused chagrin and discomfiture in his manner.  ow he saw why.

"Ah" he exclaimed.  "he was one too many for him.  hen"

"A good many times too many" laughed ollis.  "he did annaford
completely.  e strove hard to find her, and did a great deal of the
spadework himself.  And at last he ran her downin a fashionable
hotel in ondon.  e had a cotland ard man with him, and a detective
from our own policeoffice here, a man named andham, who is still in
the forceIll introduce you to him tomorrow.  annaford, finding
that rs. Whittingham had a suite of rooms in this hotela big West
nd placeleft his two men downstairs, or outside, and went up to see
her alone.  According to his own account, she was highly indignant at
any suspicions being cast upon her, and still more so, rose to a pitch
of most virtuous indignation when he told her that hed got a warrant
for her arrest and that shed have to go with him.  uring a brief
interchange of remarks she declared that if her bankers at anchester
had returned her cheque unpaid it must have been merely because they
hadnt realised certain valuable securities which shed sent to them,
and that if alladale had presented his cheque a few days later it
would have been all right.  ow, that was all boshannaford, of
course, had been in communication with the bankers all they knew of
the lady was that she had opened an account with them while staying at
some hotel in anchester, and that she had drawn all but a few pounds
of her balance the very day on which she had got the necklace from
alladale and fled with it from ellithwaite.  aturally, annaford
didnt tell her thishe merely reiterated his demand that she should
go with him.  he assented at once, only stipulating that there should
be no fussshe would walk out of the hotel with him, and he and his
satellites could come back and search her belongings at their leisure.
hen annafordwho, between you and me, etherwick, had an eye for a
pretty womanmade his mistake.  er bedroom opened out of the
sittingroom in which hed had his interview with her he was fool
enough to let her go into it alone, to get ready to go with him.  he
wentand that was the very last annaford ever saw of her"

"ade a lightning exit, eh" remarked etherwick.

"he must have gone instantly," asserted ollis.  "A door opened from
the bedroom into a corridorshe must have picked up hat and coat and
walked straight away, leaving everything she had there.  Anyway, when
annaford, tired of waiting, knocked at the door and looked in, his
bird was flown.  hen, of course, there was a hueandcry, and a fine
revelation.  But shed got clear away, probably by some side door or
other exit, and although annaford, according to his own account, raked
ondon with a comb for her, she was never found.  anished"

"And the necklace" inquired etherwick.

"hat had vanished too," replied ollis.  "hey searched her trunks and
things, but they found nothing but clothing.  Whatever she had in the
way of money and valuables shed carried off.  And so annaford came
home, considerably down in the mouth, and he had to stand a good deal
of chaff.  And if he found this womans picture in a recent
paperwell, small wonder that he did cut it out  I should say he was
probably going to set cotland ard on her trackfor, of course,
theres no timelimit to criminal proceedings."

"his is the picture he cut out," observed etherwick, producing it
from his pocketbook.  "But you say you never saw the woman"

"o, I never saw her," assented ollis, examining the print with
interested curiosity.  "o, of course, I cant recognise this.
andsome woman  But you meet me at my officeclose bytomorrow
morning, at ten, and Ill take you to our policestation.  andham will
know"

andham, an elderly man with a sphinxlike manner and watchful eyes,
laughed sardonically when ollis explained etherwicks business.  e
laughed again when etherwick showed him the print.

"Oh, aye, thats the lady" he exclaimed.  "ot changed much, neither
gad, she was a smart un, that, r. ollisI often laugh when I
think how she did annaford  But you know, annaford was a
softhearted man.  At these little affairs, he was always for sparing
peoples feelings.  All very wellbut he had to pay for trying to
spare hers  Aye, thats her  We have a portrait of her here, you
know."

"ou have, eh" exclaimed etherwick.  "I should like to see it."

"ou can see it with pleasure, sir," replied the detective.  "And look
at it as long as you like."  e turned to a desk close by and produced
a big album, full of portraits with written particulars beneath them.
"his is not, strictly speaking, a police photo," he continued.  "Its
not one that we took ourselves, ye understandwe never had the chance
obut when my lady was staying at the White Bear, she had her
portrait taken by Wintring, the photographer, in ilver treet, and
Wintring was that suited with it that he put it in his window.  o, of
course, when her ladyship popped off with alladales necklace, we got
one of those portraits, and added it to our little collection.  ere it
isand youll not notice so much difference between it and that
youve got in your hand, sir."

here was very little difference between the two photographs, and
etherwick said so.  And presently he went away from the policeoffice
wondering more than ever about the woman with whose past adventures he
was concerning himself.

"ay as well do the thing thoroughly while youre about it," remarked
ollis, as they walked off.  "ome and see alladalehis shop is only
round the corner.  ot that he can tell you much more than Ive told
you already."

But alladale proved himself able to tell a great deal more.  A grave,
elderly man, presiding over an establishment which etherwick,
unaccustomed to the opulence of provincial manufacturing towns, was
astonished to find outside ondon, he ushered his visitor into a
private room, and listened to the reasons they gave for calling on him.
After a close and careful inspection of the print which etherwick put
before him, he handed it back with a confident nod.

"here is no doubt whateverin my mindthat that is a print from a
photograph of the woman I knew as the onourable rs. Whittingham," he
said.  "And if it has been taken recently, she has altered very little
during the ten years that have elapsed since she was here in this town."

"oud be glad to see her again, r. alladalein the flesh" laughed
ollis.

he eweller shook his head.

"I think not," he answered.  "o, I think not, r. ollis.  hats an
episode which I had put out of my minduntil you recalled it."

"Butyour loss" suggested ollis.  "lose on four thousand pounds,
wasnt it"

r. alladale raised one of his white hands to his grey beard and
coughed.  It was a cough that suggested discretion, confidence,
secrecy.  e smiled behind his moustache, and his spectacled eyes
seemed to twinkle.

"I think I may venture a little disclosurein the company of two
gentlemen learned in the law," he said.  "o a solicitor whom I know
very well, and to a barrister introduced by him, I think I may reveal a
little secretbetween ourselves and to go no further.  he fact of
this matter is, gentlemenI had no loss"

"What" exclaimed ollis.  "oloss"

"ventually," replied the eweller.  "ventually  Indeed, to tell you
the truth plain, I made my profit, ander, something over."

ollis looked his bewilderment.

"o you mean thateventuallyyou were paid" he asked.

"recisely  ventuallyafter a considerable intervalI was paid,"
replied r. alladale.  "I will tell you the circumstances.  It is, I
believe, common knowledge that I sold the diamond necklace to rs.
Whittingham for three thousand, nine hundred pounds, and that the
cheque she gave me was dishonoured, and that she cleared off with the
goods and was never heard of after she escaped from annaford.  Well,
two years ago, that is to say, eight years after her disappearance, I
one day received a letter which bore the ew ork postmark.  It
contained a sheet of notepaper on which were a few words and a few
figures.  But I have that now, and Ill show it to you."

oing to a safe in the corner of his parlour, the eweller, after some
searching, produced a paper and laid it before his visitors.
etherwick examined it with curiosity.  here was no name, no address,
no date all that appeared was, as alladale had remarked, a few words,
a few figures, typewritten

  rincipal  . . . . . . . . . . ,
   years Interest   . . . .  ,
                                 
                                 ,

  raft , enclosed herein kindly acknowledge in
  ondon imes.


"nclosed, as is there said, was a draft on a ondon bank for the
specified amount," continued r. alladale.  ",  ou may easily
believe that at first I could scarcely understand this I knew of no
one in ew ork who owed me money.  But the first
figures,threw light on the matterI suddenly remembered rs.
Whittingham and my lost necklace.  hen I saw through the
thingevidently rs. Whittingham had become prosperous, wealthy, and
she was honest enough to make amends there was my principal, and eight
years interest on it.  et, I felt somewhat doubtful about taking
itI didnt know whether I mightnt be compounding a felony  ou
gentlemen, of course, will appreciate my little difficulty"

"m" remarked ollis in a noncommittal tone.  "he more interesting
matter iswhat did you do  hough I think we already know," he added
with a smile.

"Well, I went to see annaford, and told him what I had received,"
answered the eweller.  "And annaford said precisely what I expected
him to say.  e said ut the money in your pocket, alladale, and say
nothing about it  oI did"

"ach of you feeling pretty certain that rs. Whittingham was not
likely to show her face in ellithwaite again, no doubt" observed
ollis.  "ery interesting, r. alladale.  But it strikes me that
whether she ever comes to ellithwaite again or not, rs. Whittingham,
or whatever her name may be nowadays, is in ngland."

"ou think so" asked the eweller.

"er pictures recently appeared in an nglish paper, anyway," said
ollis.

"But pictures of famous American ladies appear in nglish newspapers,"
suggested r. alladale.  "I have recollections of several.  ow my
notion is that rs. Whittingham, who was a very handsome and very
charming woman, eventually went across the Atlantic and married an
American millionaire  hats how I figured it.  And I have often
wondered who she is now."

"hats precisely what I want to find out," said etherwick.  "One
thing is certainannaford knew  If hed been alive he could have
told us.  Because in whatever paper it was that this print appeared
there would be some letterpress about it, giving the name, and why it
appeared at all."

"ou can trace that," remarked ollis.

"ust so," agreed etherwick, "and I may as well get back to town and
begin the ob.  But I think with r. ollis," he added, turning to the
eweller, "I believe that the woman is here in ngland I think it
possible, too, that annaford knew where.  And I dont think it
impossible that between the time of his cutting out her picture from
the paper and the time of his sudden death he came in touch with her."

"ou think it probable that she, in some way, had something to do with
his murderif it was murder" asked r. alladale.

"I think it possible," replied etherwick.  "here are strange features
in the case.  One of the strangest is this.  Why, when annaford cut
out that picture, for his own purposes, evidently with no intention of
showing it to anyone else, did he cut it out without the name and
letterpress which must have been under and over it"

"ueer, certainly" said ollis.  "But, you know, you can soon
ascertain what that name was.  All youve got to do is to get another
copy of the paper."

"nfortunately, annafords granddaughter doesnt know what particular
paper it was," replied etherwick.  "er sole recollection of it is
that it was some local newspaper, sent to annaford by post, the very
morning that he left here for ondon."

"tillit can be traced," said ollis.  "It was in some paperand
therell be other copies."

resently he and etherwick left the ewellers shop.  Outside, ollis
led his companion across the street, and turned into a narrow alley.

"Ill show you a man wholl remember rs. Whittingham better than
anybody in ellithwaite," he said, with a laugh.  "Better even than
alladale.  I told you she stayed at the White Bear when she was
here  Well, since then the entire staff of that eminent hostelry has
been changed, from the manager to the bootsI dont think theres a
man or woman there who was there ten years ago.  But theres a man at
the end of this passage who was formerly hallporter at the White
BearAmblet udsonand who now keeps a rather cosy little saloonbar
down here well drop in on him.  es what we call a bit of a
character, and if you can get him to talk, hes usually worth listening
to."




A I

A O I

ollis led the way farther along the alley, between high, black,
windowless walls, and suddenly turning into a little court, paused
before a door set deep in the side of an old halftimbered house.

"ueer old place, this" he remarked over his shoulder.  "But youll
get a glass of as good port or sherry from this chap as youd get
anywhere in nglandhe knows his customers  ome in."

e led the way into a place the like of which etherwick had never
seena snug, cosy room, panelled and raftered in old oak, with a
bright fire burning in an open hearth and the flicker of its flames
dancing on the old brass and pewter that ornamented the walls.  here
was a small barcounter on one side of it and behind this, in his
shirtsleeves, and with a cigar protruding from the corner of a pair of
cleanshaven, humorous lips, stood a keeneyed man, busily engaged in
polishing wineglasses.

"ood morning, gentlemen" he said heartily.  "ice morning, r.
ollis, for the time o year.  And what can I do for you and your
friend, sir"

ollis glanced round the roomempty, save for themselves.  e drew a
stool to the bar and motioned etherwick to follow his example.

"I think well try your very excellent dry sherry, udson," he
answered.  "hat is, if its as good as it was last time I tasted it."

"Always up to standard, r. ollis, always up to standard, sir"
replied the barkeeper.  "o inferior qualities, no substitutes, and no
trading on past reputation in this establishment, gentlemen  As good a
glass of dry sherry here, sir, as youd get where sherry wine comes
fromand you cant say that of most places in ngland, I think.
verythings of the best here, r. ollisas you know"

ollis responded with a little light chaff suddenly he bent across the
bar.

"udson" he said confidentially.  "y friend here has something hed
like to show you.  ow, then," he continued, as etherwick, in response
to this, had produced the picture, "do you recognise that"

he barkeeper put on a pair of spectacles and turned the picture to
the light, examining it closely.  is lips tightened then relaxed in a
cynical smile.

"Aye" he said, half carelessly.  "Its the woman that did old
alladale out of that diamond necklace.  Of courseistress
Whittingham"

"Would you know her again, if you met hernow" asked ollis.

he barkeeper picked up one of his glasses and began a vigorous
polishing.

"Aye" he answered, laconically.  "And I should know her by something
else than her face"

ust then two men came in, and udson broke off to attend to their
wants.  But presently they carried their glasses away to a snug corner
near the fire, and the barkeeper once more turned to ollis and
etherwick.

"Aye" he said confidentially.  "If need were, I could tell that party
by something else than her face, handsome as that is  I used to tell
annaford when he was busy trying to find her that if hed any
difficulty about making certain, I could identify her if nobody else
could  ou see, I saw a deal of her when she was stopping at the
White Bear.  And I knew something that nobody else knew."

"What is it" asked etherwick.

udson leaned closer across the counter and lowered his voice.

"he was a big, handsome woman, this rs. Whittingham," he continued.
"ery showy, dressy woman fond of fine clothes and ewellery, and so
on sort of woman, you know, that would attract attention anywhere.
And one of these women, too, that was evidently used to being waited on
hand and footshe took her moneys worth out of the White Bear, I
can tell you  I did a deal for her, one way or another, and Ill say
this for her she was free enough with her money.  If it so happened
that she wanted things doing for her, she kept you fairly on the go
till they were done, but she threw fiveshilling pieces and halfcrowns
about as if they were farthings  hed send you to take a sixpenny
telegram and give you a couple of shillings for taking it.  Well, now,
as I say, I saw a deal of her, one way and another, getting cabs for
her, and taking things up to her room, and doing this, that, and
tother.  And it was with going up there one day suddenlike, with a
telegram that had ust come, that I found out something about
hersomething that, as I say, I could have told her by anywhere, even
if she could have changed her face and put a wig on"

"Ayeand what, now" asked ollis.

"his" answered udson with a knowing look.  "aybe Im a noticing
sort of chapanyhow, there was a thing I always noticed about rs.
Whittingham.  Wherever she was, and no matter how she was dressed,
whether it was in her goingout things or her dinner finery, she always
wore a band of black velvet round her right forearm, ust above the
wrist, where women wear bracelets.  In fact, it was a sort of bracelet,
a strip, as I say, of black velvet, happen about two inches wide, and
on the front a cameo ornament, the size of a shilling, white stone or
something of that sort, with one of these heathen figures carved on it.
here were other folk about the place noticed that black velvet band,
tooI tell you she was never seen without it the chambermaids said
she slept with it on.  But on the occasion Im telling you about, when
I went up to her room with a telegram, I caught her without it.  he
opened her door to see who knockedshe was in a dressinggown, going
to change for dinner, I reckon, and she held out her right hand for
what Id brought her.  he black velvet band wasnt on it, and for ust
a second like I saw what was on her arm"

"es" said ollis.  "omethingremarkable"

"or a ladyaye" replied udson, with a grim laugh.  "er arm was
tattooed  ight round the place where she always wore this black
velvet band there was a snake, red and green, and yellow, and blue,
with its tail in its mouthwonderfully done, too it had been no
novice that had done that bit of work, I can tell you  Of course, I
ust saw it, and no more, but there was a strong electric light close
by, and I did see it, and saw it plain and all.  And thats a thing
that that woman, whoever she may be, and wherever shes got to, can
never rub off, nor scrub offshell carry that to the day of her
death."

he two listeners looked at each other.

"Odd" remarked ollis.

etherwick turned to the barkeeper.

"id she notice that you saw that her arm was tattooed" he asked.

"ay, I dont think she did," replied udson.  "Of course, the thing
was over in a second.  I made no sign that Id seen aught particular,
and she said nought.  ButI saw"

ust then other customers came in, and the barkeeper turned away to
attend to their wants.  ollis and etherwick moved from the counter to
one of the snug corners at the farther end of the room.

"Whoever she may be, wherever she may beas udson said ust now,"
remarked ollis, "and if this woman really had anything to do with the
mysterious circumstances of annafords death, she ought not to be
difficult to find.  A woman who carries an indefaceable mark like that
on her arm, and whose picture has recently appeared in a newspaper,
should easily be traced."

"I think I shall get at her through the picture," agreed etherwick.
"he newspaper production seems to have been done from a photograph
which, from its clearness and finish, was probably taken by some
firstclass firm in ondon.  I shall go round such firms as soon as I
get back.  It may be, of course, that shes nothing whatever to do with
annafords murder, but still, its a trail thats got to be followed
to the end now that ones started out on it.  Well that seems to
finish my business hereas far as shes concerned.  But theres
another matterI told you that when annaford came to town he had on
him a sealed packet containing the secret of some invention or
discovery, and that its strangely and unaccountably missing.  is
granddaughter says that he worked this thing outwhatever it isin a
laboratory that he had in his garden.  ow then, before I go I want to
see that laboratory.  As hes only recently left the place, I suppose
things will still be pretty much as he left them at his old house.
Where did he live"

"e lived on the outskirts of the town," replied ollis.  "An
oldfashioned house that he bought some years agoI know it by sight
well enough, though Ive never been in it.  I dont suppose its let
yet, though I know its being advertised in the local papers.  ets
get some lunch at the White Bear, and then well drive up there and
see what we can do.  ou want to get an idea of what it was that
annaford had invented"

"ust so," assented etherwick.  "If the secret was worth all that he
told his granddaughter it was, he may have been murdered by somebody
who wanted to get sole possession of it.  Anyway, its another trail
thats got to be worked on."

"I never heard of annaford as an inventor or experimenter," remarked
ollis.  "But there, I knew little about him, except in his official
capacity he and his granddaughter, and an elderly woman they kept as a
working housekeeper, were quiet sort of folk.  I knew that he brought
up his granddaughter from infancy, and gave her a rattling good
education at the irls igh chool, but beyond that, I know little of
their private affairs.  I suppose he amused himself in this laboratory
you speak of in his spare time"

"abbled in chemistry, I understand," said etherwick.  "And, if it
hasnt been dismantled, we may find something in that laboratory that
will give us a clue of some sort."

ollis seemed to reflect for a minute or two.

"Ive an idea" he said suddenly.  "heres a man who lunches at the
White Bear every daya man named ollison hes analytical chemist
to a big firm of dyers in the town.  Ive seen him in conversation with
annaford now and then.  erhaps he could tell us something on this
point.  ome on  this is ust about his time for lunch."

A few minutes later, in the coffeeroom of the hotel, ollis led
etherwick up to a bearded and spectacled man who had ust sat down to
lunch, and having introduced him, briefly detailed the obect of his
visit to ellithwaite.  ollison nodded and smiled.

"I understand," he said, as they seated themselves at his table.
"annaford did dabble a bit in chemistryin quite an amateur way.  But
as to inventing anything that was worth all thatcome  till, he was
an ingenious man, for an amateur, and he may have hit on something
fairly valuable."

"ouve no idea what he was after" suggested etherwick.

"Of late, no  But some time ago he was immensely interested in aniline
dyes," replied ollison.  "e used to talk to me about them.  hats a
subect of infinite importance in this district.  Of course, as I dare
say you know, the ermans have been vastly ahead of us as regards
aniline dyes, and weve got most, if not all, of the stuff used, from
ermany.  annaford used to worry himself as to why we couldnt make
our own aniline dyes, and I believe he experimented.  But, with his
resources, as an amateur, of course, that was hopeless."

"Ive sometimes seen him talking to you," observed ollis.  "ouve no
idea what he was after, of late"

"o.  e used to ask me technical questions," answered ollison.  "ou
know, I ust regarded him as a man who had a natural taste for
experimenting with things.  his was evidently his hobby.  I used to
chaff him about it.  till, he was a purposeful man, and by reading and
experiment hed picked up a lot of knowledge."

"And, I suppose, its within the bounds of possibility that he had hit
on something of practical value" suggested etherwick.

"Oh, quite within such boundsand he may have done," agreed ollison.
"Ive known of much greater amateurs suddenly discovering something.
he question then isdo they know enough to turn their discovery to
any practical purpose and account"

"vidently, from what he told his granddaughter, annaford did think he
knew enough," said etherwick.  "What I want to find out from a visit
to his old laboratory iswhat had he discovered"

"And as youre not a chemist, nor even a dabbler," remarked ollis,
with a laugh, "that wont be easy  oud better come with us after
lunch, ollison."

"I can give you a couple of hours," assented ollison.  "Im already
curiousespecially if any discovery we can make tends to throw light
on the mystery of annafords death.  ity the police havent got hold
of the man who was with him," he added, glancing at etherwick.  "I
suppose you could identify him"

"nless hes an absolute adept at disguising himself, yespositively"
replied etherwick.  "e was a noticeable man."

An hour later the three men drove up to a house which stood a little
way out of the town, on the edge of the moorland that stretched towards
the great range of hills on the west.  he house, an oldfashioned,
solitary place, was empty, save for a caretaker who had been installed
in its back rooms to keep it aired and to show it to possible tenants.
he laboratory, a stonewalled, timberroofed shed at the end of the
garden, had never been opened, said the caretaker, since r. annaford
locked it up and left it.  But the key was speedily forthcoming, and
the three visitors entered and looked round, each with different
valuings of what he saw.

he whole place was a wilderness of litter and untidiness.  Whatever
annaford had possessed in the way of laboratory plant and appliances
had been removed, and now there was little but rubbishglass, whole
and broken, paper, derelict boxes and crates, odds and ends of
wreckageto look at.  But the analytical chemist glanced about him
with a knowing eye, examining bottles and boxes, picking up a thing
here and another there, and before long he turned to his companions
with a laugh, pointing at the same time to a table in a corner which
was covered with and dustlined pots.

"Its very easy to see what annaford was after" he said.  "es been
trying to evolve a new ink"

"Ink" exclaimed ollis incredulously.  "Arent there plenty of inks on
the market"

"o end" agreed ollison with another laugh, and again pointing to the
table.  "hese are specimens of all the betterknown onesBritish, of
course, for no really decent ink is made elsewhere.  But even the very
best ink, up to now, isnt perfect.  annaford perhaps thought, being
an amateur, that he could make a better than the known best.
Inkthats what hes been after.  A superior, perfectlyfluid,
penetrating, permanent, noncorrosive writinginkthats been his
notion, a thousand to one  I observe the presence of lots of stuffs
that hes used."

e showed them various things, explaining their properties and adding
some remarks on the history of the manufacture of writinginks during
the last hundred years.

"aking it altogether," he concluded, "and in spite of manufacturers
advertisements and boasting, there isnt a really absolutely perfect
writingfluid on the marketthat I know of, anyway.  If annaford
thought he could make one, and succeeded, well, Id be glad to have his
formula  oney in it"

"o the extent of a hundred thousand pounds" asked etherwick,
remembering what hona had told him.  "All that"

"Oh, well" laughed ollison, "you must remember that inventors are
always very sanguine always apt to see everything through
rosecoloured spectacles invariably prone to exaggerate the merits of
their inventions.  But if annaford, by experiment, really hit on a
firstclass formula for making a writingink superior in all the
necessary qualities to its rivalsyes, thered be a pot of money in
it.  o doubt of that"

"I suppose hed have to take out a patent for his invention" suggested
etherwick.

"Oh, to be sure  I should think that was one of his reasons for going
to ondonto see after it." assented ollison.  e looked round again,
and again laughed.  "Well," he said, "I think you know nowyou may be
confident about it from what Ive seen herewhat annaford was after
Inkust ink"

etherwick accepted this udgment, and when he left ellithwaite later
in the afternoon on his return ourney to ondon, he summed up the
results of his visit.  hey were two.  irst, he had discovered that
the woman of whom annaford had spoken in the train was a person who
ten years before had been known as rs. Whittingham, appeared to be
some sort of an adventuress, and, in spite of her restitution to the
eweller whom she had defrauded, was still liable to arrest,
conviction, and punishmentif she could be found.  econd, he had
found out that the precious invention of which annaford had spoken so
confidently and enthusiastically to his granddaughter and the
particulars of which had mysteriously disappeared, related to the
manufacture of a new writingink, which might, in truth, prove a very
valuable commercial asset.  o far, so good he was finding things out.
As he ate his dinner in the restaurant car he considered his next
steps.  But it needed little consideration to resolve on them.  e must
find out all about the woman whose picture lay in his pocketbookwhat
she now called herself where she was how her photograph came to be
reproduced in a newspaper and, last, but far from least, if annaford,
after seeing the reproduction, had got into touch with her or given
information about her.  o the man in the train annaford had remarked
that he had said nothing about her until that eveningyes, but was
that man the only man to whom he had spoken  o much for thatand the
next thing was to find out somehow what had become of the sealed packet
which annaford undoubtedly had on him when he went out of alters
otel on the night of his death.




A II

BA 

ext morning, and before calling on either enthwaite or hona
annaford, etherwick set out on a tour of the fashionable
photographers in the West nd of ondon.  After all, there were not so
many of them, so many at any rate of the very famous ones.  e made a
hit and began to work methodically.  is first few coverts were drawn
blank, but ust before noon, and as he was thinking of knocking off for
lunch, he started his fox.  In a palatial establishment in Bond treet
the person to whom he applied, showing his picture, gave an immediate
smile of recognition.

"ou want to know who is the original of this" he said.  "ertainly
ady iversreade, of iversreade ourt, near orking."

etherwick had no deep acquaintance with ebrett nor with Burke, nor
even with the list of peers, baronets and knights given in the ordinary
reference books, and to him the name of ady iversreade was absolutely
unknownhe had never heard of her.  But the man to whom he had shown
the print, and who now held it in his hand, seemed to consider that
ady iversreade was, or should be, as well known to everybody as she
evidently was to him.

"his print is from one of our photographs of ady iversreade," he
said, turning to a side table in the receptionroom in which they were
standing and picking up a framed portrait.  "his one."

"hen you probably know in what newspaper this print appeared"
suggested etherwick.  "hats really what Im desirous of finding out."

"Oh, it appeared in several," answered the photographer.  "ecently.
It was about the time that ady iversreade opened some home or
instituteI forget what.  here was an account of it in the papers,
and naturally her portrait was reproduced."

etherwick made a plausible prearranged excuse for his curiosity, and
went away.  ady iversreadeevidently some woman of rank, or means,
or position.  But was she identical with the rs. Whittingham of ten
years agothe rs. Whittingham who did the ellithwaite eweller out
of a necklace worth nearly four thousand pounds and cleverly escaped
arrest at the hands of annaford  And if so...

But that led to indefinite vistas the main thing at present was to
find out all that could be found out about ady iversreade, of
iversreade ourt, near orking.  etherwick could doubtless have
obtained considerable information from the fashionable photographer,
but he had carefully refrained from showing too much inquisitiveness.
oreover, he knew a man, one Boxley, a fellow clubmember, who was
always fully posted up in all the doings of the social and fashionable
world and could, if he would, tell him everything about ady
iversreadethat was, if there was anything to tell about her.  Boxley
was one of those bachelor men about town who went everywhere, knew
everybody, and kept himself fully informed he invariably lunched at
this particular club, the unior egatherium, and thither etherwick
presently proceeded, bent on finding him.

e was fortunate in running Boxley to earth almost as soon as he
entered the sacred and exclusive portals.  Boxley was lunching and
there was no one else at his table.  etherwick oined him, and began
the usual small talk about nothing in particular.  But he soon came to
his one point.

"ook here" he said, at a convenient interval.  "I want to ask you
something.  ou know everybody and everything.  Who is ady
iversreade, whos recently opened some home or institution, or
hospital or something"

"One of the richest women in ngland" replied Boxley promptly.  "Worth
a couple of millions or so.  hats who she iswho she was, I dont
know.  ont suppose anybody else does, either.  In this country,
anyhow."

"What, is she a foreigner, then" asked etherwick.  "Ive seen her
portrait in the papersthats why I asked you who she is.  oesnt
look foreign, I think."

"I can tell you all that is known about her," said Boxley, "and thats
not much.  hes the widow of old ir ohn iversreade, the famous
contractorthe man who made a pot of money building railways, and dams
across big rivers, and that sort of thing, and got a knighthood for it.
e also built himself a magnificent place near orking, and called it
iversreade ourtust the type of place a modern millionaire would
build.  ow, old ir ohn had been a bachelor all his life, until he
was over sixtyno time for anything but his contracts, you know.  But
when he was about sixtyfive, which would be some six or seven years
ago, he went over to the nited tates and made a rather lengthy stay
there.  And when he returned he brought a wife with himthe lady
youre inquiring about."

"American, then" suggested etherwick.

"Well, he married her over there, certainly," said Boxley.  "But I
should say she isnt American."

"ouve met herpersonally"

"ust.  un across her once or twice at various affairs, and been
introduced to her, quite casually.  o, I dont think shes American.
If I wanted to label her, I should say she was cosmopolitan."

"Woman of the world, eh"

"ecidedly so.  andsome womanselfpossessedselfassuredsmart,
clever.  I think shell know how to take care of the money her husband
left her."

"eave her everything"

"very pennyexcept some inconsiderable legacies to charitable
institutions.  It was said at the timeits two years since the old
chap diedthat shes got over two millions."

"And this institution, or whatever it is"

"Oh, that  hat was in the papers not so long since."

"Im no great reader of newspapers.  What about it"

"Oh, shes started a home for wounded officers near iversreade ourt.
here was some big country house near there emptycouldnt really be
sold or let.  he bought it, renovated it, fitted it up, stuck a staff
of nurses and servants in, and got it blessed by the War Office.  olly
nice place, I believe, and she pays the piper."

"oing the benevolent business, eh"

"o it appears.  asy game, too, when youve got a couple of millions
behind you.  seful, though."

Boxley went away soon after that, and etherwick, wondering about what
he had learned, and now infinitely inquisitive about the identity of
ady iversreade with rs. Whittingham, went into the smokingroom, and
more from habit than because he really wanted to see it, picked up a
copy of he imes.  Almost the first thing on which his glance
lighted was the name that was ust then in his thoughtsthere it was,
in capitals, at the head of an advertisement


"A IA O O WO OI, .equired at
once a esident adyecretary, fully competent to undertake accounts
and correspondence and thoroughly trained in shorthand and typewriting
a knowledge of rench and erman would be a high recommendation.
Application should be made personally any day this week between .
and . and . and . to ady iversreade, iversreade ourt,
orking."


etherwick threw the paper aside, left the club, and at the first
newsagents he came to bought another copy.  With this in his hand he
umped into a taxicab and set off for urrey treet, wondering if he
would find hona annaford still at alters otel.  e was fortunate
in thatshe had not yet leftand in a few minutes he was giving her a
full and detailed account of his doings since his last interview with
her.  he listened to his story about ellithwaite and his discoveries
of that morning with a slightly puzzled look.

"Why are you taking all this trouble" she asked suddenly and abruptly.
"oure doing more, going into things more, than the police are.
atherfield was here this morning to tell me, he said, how they were
getting on.  hey arent getting on at allthey havent made one
single discovery theyve heard nothing, found out nothing, about the
man in the train or the man at ictoriatheyre ust where they were.
But youyouve found out a lot  Why are you so energetic about it"

"ut it down to professional inquisitiveness, if you like," answered
etherwick, smiling.  "Iminterested.  remendously  ou seeI,
too, was there in the train, like the man they havent found.  Well,
nownow that Ive got to this point Ive arrived at, I want you to
take a hand."

"I  In what way" exclaimed hona.

etherwick pulled out he imes and pointed to the advertisement.

"I want you to go down to orking tomorrow morning and personally
interview ady iversreade in response to that," he said.  "ouve all
the qualifications she specifies, so youve an excellent excuse for
calling on her.  Whether youd care to take the post is another
matterwhat I want is that you should see her under conditions that
will enable you to observe her closely."

"Why" asked hona.

"I want you to see if she wears such a band as that which udson told
ollis and myself about," replied etherwick.  "harp eyes like yours
will soon see that.  Andif she does, then shes rs. Whittingham  In
that case, I might ask you to do morestill more."

"What, for instance" she inquired.

"Well, to do your best to get this post," he answered.  "I think that
you, with your qualifications, could get it."

"Andyour obect in that" she asked.

"o keep an eye on ady iversreade," he replied promptly.  "If the
rs. Whittingham of ten years ago at ellithwaite is the same woman as
the ady iversreade of iversreade ourt of today, then, in view of
your grandfathers murder, I want to know a lot more about her  o
have youtherewould be an immense help."

"Im to be a sort of spy, eh" asked hona.

"etective, if you like," assented etherwick.  "Why not"

"ou forget this," she remarked.  "If this ady iversreade is
identical with the rs. Whittingham of ten years ago, shed remember my
nameannaford  hes not likely to have forgotten uperintendent
annaford of ellithwaite"

"xactlybut Ive thought of that little matter," replied etherwick.
"all yourself by some other name.  our mothers, for instance."

"hat was eatherstone," said hona.

"here you are  o as iss eatherstone.  As for your address, give
your aunts address at ooting.  asy enough, you see," laughed
etherwick.  "Once you begin it properly."

"heres another thing, though," she obected.  "eferences  hell
want those."

"ust as easy," answered etherwick.  "ive me as one and enthwaite as
the other.  Ill speak to him about it.  wo barristers of the iddle
empleexcellent  omeall youve got to do is to work the scheme
out fully and carry it out with assurance, and you dont know what we
might discover."

hona considered matters awhile, watching him steadily.

"ou think thatsomehowthis woman may be at the back of the mystery
surrounding my grandfathers murder" she suddenly asked.

"I think its quite within the bounds of probability," he answered.

"All right," she said abruptly.  "Ill go.  omorrow morning, I
suppose"

"ooner the better," agreed etherwick.  "And, look here, Ill go down
with you.  Well go by the . from ictoria, drive to this place,
and Ill wait outside while you have your interview.  After that well
get some lunch in orkingand you can tell me your news."

ext morning found etherwick pacing the platform at ictoria and on
the lookout for his fellowcompanion.  he came to him a little before
the train was due to leave, and he noticed at once that she had
discarded the mourning garments in which he had found her the previous
afternoon she now appeared in a smart tailormade coat and skirt, and
looked the part he wanted her to assumethat of a capable and
selfreliant young business woman.

"ood" he said approvingly, as they went to find their seats.
"othing like dressing up to it.  oure all ready with your lines,
ehI mean, youve settled on all youre going to say and do"

"eave that to me," she answered with a laugh, "I shant forget the
primary obect, anyway.  But Ive been wonderingsupposing we come to
the conclusion that this ady iversreade is the rs. Whittingham of
ten years ago  What are you going to do then"

"y ideas are hazy on that pointat present," confessed etherwick.
"he first thing, surely, is to establish identity.  ont forget that
the main thing to do at iversreade ourt is to get a good look at ady
iversreades right wrist, and see whats on it"

iversreade ourt proved to be some distance from orking, in the eith
ill district etherwick charted a taxicab and gave his companion
final instructions as they rode out.  alf an hours run brought them
to the housea big, pretentious, imitation lizabethan structure, set
on the hillside amongst a grove of firs and pines, and having an
ornamental park laid out between its gardens and terraces and the high
road.  At the lodge gates he stopped the driver and got out.

"Ill wait here for you," he said to hona.  "ou ride up to the house,
get your business done, and come back here.  Be watchful nowof
anything."

hona nodded reassuringly and went off etherwick lighted his pipe and
strolled about admiring the scenery.  But his thoughts were with hona
he was wondering what adventures she was having in the big mansion
which the late contractor had built amidst the woods.  And hona kept
him wondering some time an hour had elapsed before the cab came back.
With a hand on its door, he turned to the driver

"o to the White orse now," he said.  "Well lunch there, and
afterwards you can take us to the station.  Well" he continued, as he
got in and seated himself at honas side.  "What luck"

"ood, I should say," answered hona.  "he wears a broad black velvet
band on her right wrist, and on the outer face is a small cameo.  ows
that"

"recisely" exclaimed etherwick.  "ust what that barkeeper chap at
ellithwaite described.  Wears it openlymakes no attempt at
concealment beneath her sleeve, eh"

"one," answered hona.  "he was wearing a smart, fashionable,
shortsleeved umper.  hed a very fine diamond bracelet on the other
wrist."

"And she herself," asked etherwick.  "What sort of woman is she"

"hats a very good photograph of her that my grandfather cut out of
the paper," replied hona.  "ery good, indeed  I knew her at once.
hes a tall, fine, handsome, wellpreserved woman, perhaps forty,
perhaps less.  ery easy, accustomed manner a regular woman of the
world I should think.  uite ready to talk about herself and her
doingsshe told me the whole history of this ome shes started and
took me to see itits a fine old house, much more attractive than the
ourt, a little way along the hillside.  he told me that it was her
great hobby, and that shes devoting all her time to it.  I should say
that shes genuinely interested in its welfaregenuinely"

"he impressed you" suggested etherwick.

"I think, from what I saw and heard, that shes a goodnatured,
probably warmhearted, woman.  he spoke very feelingly of the patients
shes got in her ome, anyhow."

"And the postthe secretaryship"

"I can have it if I want itof course, I told her I did.  he examined
me pretty closely about my qualificationsshe herself speaks rench
and erman like a nativeand I mentioned you and r. enthwaite as
references.  hes going to write to you both today.  oits for you
to decide."

"I suppose its really for you"

"oIm willing, eager, indeed, to do anything to clear up the
mystery about my grandfathers murder.  ButI dont think this woman
had anything to do with it.  In my opinionand I suppose Ive got some
feminine intuitionshes honest and straightforward enough."

"And yet it looks as if she were certainly the rs. Whittingham who did
a ellithwaite eweller to the tune of four thousand pounds" laughed
etherwick.  "hat wasnt very honest or straightforward"

"Ive been thinking about that," said hona.  "erhaps, after all, she
really thought the cheque would be met, and anyway, she did send the
man his money, even though it was a long time afterwards.  And
againan important matterady iversreade may not be rs.
Whittingham at all.  ore women than one wear wristlets of velvet."

"Butthe portrait" exclaimed etherwick.  "he positive identity"

"Well," answered hona, "Im willing to go there and to try to find out
more.  But, frankly, I think ady iversreades all right  irst
impression, anyhow"

he cab drew up at the "White orse," and etherwick led hona into the
coffeeroom.  But they had hardly taken their seats when the manager
came in.

"oes your name happen to be etherwick, sir" he inquired.  "ust
sothank you.  A r. apperley has twice rung you up here during the
last hourhes on the phone again now, if youll speak to him."

"Ill come," said etherwick.  "hats my clerk," he murmured to hona
as he rose.  "I told him to ring me up here between twelve and three if
necessary.  Back in a minute."

But he was away several minutes, and when he came to her again, his
face was grave.  "eres a new development" he said, bending across
the table and whispering.  "he police have found the man who was with
your grandfather in the train  atherfield wants me to identify him.
And youll gather from that that theyve found him dead  We must lunch
quickly and catch the twotwentyfour."




A III

IWOO 

etherwick went to the hotel telephone again before he had finished his
lunch, and as a result atherfield was on the platform at ictoria when
the twotwentyfour ran in.  e showed no surprise at seeing etherwick
and hona together his manifest concern was to get etherwick to
himself and away from the station.  And etherwick, seeing this, said
goodbye to hona with a whispered word that he would look in at
alters otel before evening a few minutes later he and atherfield
were in a taxicab together, hastening along Buckingham alace oad.

"Well" inquired etherwick.  "his man"

"I dont think theres any doubt about his being the man you saw with
annaford," replied atherfield.  "e answers to your description,
anyway.  But Ill tell you how we came across his track.  ast night a
man named Appleyard came to mehes a chap who has a chemists shop in
orseferry oad, Westminstera middleaged, quiet sort of man, who
prefaced his remarks by telling us that he very rarely had time to read
newspapers or hed have been round to see us before.  But yesterday he
happened to pick up a copy of one of last undays papers, and he read
an account of the annaford affair.  hen he remembered something that
seemed to him to have a possible connection with it.  ome little time
ago he advertised for an assistanta qualified assistant.  ed two or
three applications which werent exactly satisfactory.  hen, one
eveninghe couldnt give any exact date, but from various things he
told us I reckoned up that it must have been on the very evening on
which annaford met his deatha man came and made a personal
application.  Appleyard described himmediumsized, a spare man,
sallowcomplexioned, thin face and beard, large dark eyes, very
intelligent, superior manner, poorly dressed, and evidently in low
water"

"hats the man, Ill be bound" exclaimed etherwick.  "id he give
this chemist his name"

"e didname and address," answered atherfield.  "e said his name
was ames ranett, and his address umber , ligwoods ents, rays
Inn oadolborn end.  e told Appleyard that he was a qualified
chemist, and produced his proofs and some references.  e also said
that though hed never had a business of his own hed been employed,
as, indeed, the references showed, by some good provincial firms at one
time or another.  ately hed been in the employ of a firm of
manufacturing chemists in ast amfor some reason or other their
trade had fallen off, and theyd had to reduce their staff, and hed
been thrown out of work, and had had the further bad luck to be
seriously ill.  his, he said, had exhausted his small means, and he
was very anxious to get another obso anxious that he appeared to
come to Appleyard on very low terms.  Appleyard told him hed inquire
into the references and write to him in a day or two.  e did inquire,
found the references quite satisfactory, and wrote to ranett engaging
him.  But ranett never turned up, and Appleyard heard no more of him
until he read this unday paper.  hen he felt sure ranett was the
man, and came to me."

"I shouldnt think theres any doubt in the case," remarked etherwick.
"But before we go any further, a question.  id Appleyard say what time
it was when this man came to him that evening"

"e did.  It was ust as he was closing his shopnine oclock.
ranett stopped talking with him about half an hour.  Indeed, Appleyard
told me more.  After theyd finished their talk, Appleyard, who doesnt
live at the shop, locked it up, and he then invited ranett to step
across the street with him and have a drink before going home.  hey
had a drink together in a neighbouring saloon bar, and chatted a bit
there it would be nearly ten oclock, according to Appleyard, when
ranett left him.  And he remembered that ranett, on leaving him, went
round the corner into ictoria treet, on his way, no doubt, to the
nderground."

"And in ictoria treet, equally without doubt, he met annaford,"
muttered etherwick.  "Well, and the rest of it"

"Well, of course, as soon as I learnt all this, I determined to go
myself to ligwoods ents," replied atherfield.  "I went, first thing
this morning.  ligwoods ents is a slum streetonly a man who is
very low down in the world would ever dream of renting a room there.
Its a sort of alley or court on the righthand side of rays Inn
oad, going upsome halfdozen squalid houses on each side, let off in
tenements.  umber  was a particularly squalid houseslatternly
women and squalling brats about the door and general dirt and
shabbiness all round.  one of the women about the place knew the name
of ranett, but after Id described the man I wanted they argued that
it must be the gentleman on the top back they added the further
information that they hadnt seen him for some days.  I went up a
filthy stair to the room they indicated the door was locked and I
couldnt get any response to my repeated knockings.  o then I set out
to discover the landlord, and eventually unearthed a beery individual
in a neighbouring lowclass tavern.  I got out of him that he had a
lodger named ranett, who paid him six shillings a week for this top
back room, and he suddenly remembered that ranett hadnt paid his last
weeks rent.  hat made more impression on him than anything I said,
and he went with me to the house.  And to cut things short, we forced
the door, and found the man dead in his bed"

"ead" exclaimed etherwick.  "eadthen"

"ead thenyes, and hed been dead several days, according to the
doctors," replied atherfield grimly.  "ead enough  It was a poor
room, but cleanyou could see from various little things that the man
had been used to a better condition.  But as regards himselfhed
evidently gone to bed in the usual way.  is clothes were all carefully
folded and arranged, and by the side of the bed there was a chair on
which was a halfburnt candle and an evening newspaper."

"hat would fix the date," suggested etherwick.

"Of course, it didand it was the same date as that on which annaford
died," answered atherfield.  "Ive made a careful note of that
circumstance  verything looked as if the man had gone to bed in ust
his ordinary way, read the paper a bit, blown out his light, dropped
off to sleep, and died in his sleep."

"esand from what cause, I wonder" exclaimed etherwick.

"recisely the same idea occurred to me, knowing what I did about
annaford," said atherfield.  "owever, the doctors will tell us more
about that.  But to wind upI had a man of mine with me, and I left
him in charge while I got further help, and sent for Appleyard.
Appleyard identified the dead man at once as the man who had been to
see him.  Indeed, on opening the door, we found Appleyards letter,
engaging him, lying with one or two others, ust inside.  o thats
about all, except that I now want to know if you can positively
identify him as the man you saw with annaford, and that I also want to
open a locked box that we found in the room, which may contain
something that will give us further information.  Altogether, its a
step forward."

"es," admitted etherwick.  "Its something.  But theres spadework
to be done yet, atherfield.  I dont think theres any doubt, now,
that ranett encountered annaford after he left Appleyardand that
indicates that ranett and annaford were old acquaintances.  But,
supposing they met at, or soon after, ten oclockwhere did they go,
where did they spend their time between that and the time they entered
my compartment at t. amess ark"

"hat would bewhat" asked atherfield.

"It was well after midnightmine was the last train going east,
anyway," said etherwick.  "I only ust caught it at loane quare.
But we can ascertain the exact time, to a minute.  till, those two,
meeting accidentally, as I conclude they did, must have been together
two or three hours.  Whereat that time of night.  urely there must
be some way of finding that out  wo men, each rather
noticeablesomebody must have seen them together, somewhere  It seems
impossible that they shouldnt have been seen."

"Aye, but in my experience, r. etherwick, its the impossible that
happens" reoined atherfield.  "In a beehive like this, where every
mans intent on his own business, ninetynine men out of a hundred
never observe anything unless its shoved right under their very eyes.
Of course, if we could find out if and where annaford and ranett were
together that night, and where ranett went to after he slipped away at
haring ross, it would vastly simplify matters.  But how are we going
to find out  heres been immense publicity given to this case in the
papers, you know, r. etherwickportraits of annaford, and details
about the whole affair, and so on, and yet weve had surprisingly
little help and less information.  Ill tell you what it is, sirwhat
we want is that tall, muffledup chap who met annaford at ictoria
Who is he, now"

"Who, indeed" assented etherwick.  "anishedwithout a trace."

"Oh, well" said atherfield cheerfully, "you never know when you might
light on a trace.  But here we are at this unsavoury ligwoods ents."

he cab pulled up at the entrance to a dark, highwalled, stonepaved
alley, which at that moment appeared to be full of women and children
so, too, did the windows on either side.  he whole place was sombre
and evilsmelling, and etherwick felt a sense of pity for the
unfortunate man whose luck had been bad enough to bring him there.

"A murder, a suicide, or a sudden death is as a breath of heaven to
these folk" said atherfield as they made their way through the ragged
and frowsy gathering.  "Its an event in uneventful lives.  eres the
place," he added, as they came to a doorway whereat a policeman stood
on guard.  "And here are the stairsmind you dont slip on em, for
the woods broken and the banisters are smashed."

etherwick cautiously followed his guide to the top of the house.
here at another door stood a second policeman, engaged when they
caught sight of him in looking out through the dirtobscured window of
the landing.  is bored countenance brightened when he saw atherfield
stepping back he quietly opened the door at his side.  And the two
newcomers, silent in view of the task before them, tiptoed into the
room beyond.

It was, as atherfield had remarked, a poor place, but it was clean and
orderly, and its occupant had evidently tried to make it as habitable
and comfortable as his means would allow.  here were one or two good
prints on the table half a dozen books on an old chest of drawers in
a cracked vase on the mantelpiece there were a few flowers, wilted and
dead.  etherwick took in all this at a glance then he turned to
atherfield, who silently drew aside a sheet from the head and
shoulders of the rigid figure on the bed, and looked inquiringly at his
companion.  And etherwick gave the dead mans face one careful
inspection and nodded.

"es" he said.  "hats the man"

"Without doubt" asked atherfield.

"o doubt at all," affirmed etherwick.  "hat is the man who was with
annaford in the train.  I knew him instantly."

atherfield replaced the sheet and turned to a small table which stood
in the window.  On it was a box, a square, oldfashioned thing, clamped
at the corners.

"his seems to be the only thing he had thats what you may call
private," he observed.  "Its locked, but Ive got a tool here thatll
open it.  I want to know whats in itthere may be something thatll
give us a clue."

etherwick stood by while atherfield forced open the lock with an
instrument which he produced from his pocket, and began to examine the
contents of the box.  At first there seemed little that was likely to
yield information.  here was a complete suit of clothes and an outfit
of decent linen it seemed as if ranett had carefully kept these in
view of better days.  here were more books, all of a technical nature,
relating to chemistry there was a small case containing chemical
apparatus, and another in which lay a pair of scales in a third they
found a microscope.

"e wasnt down to the very end of his resources, or hed have pawned
these things," muttered atherfield.  "hey all look good stuff,
especially the microscope.  But heres more what I wantletters"

e drew forth two bundles of letters, neatly arranged and tied up with
tape.  nloosing the fastenings and rapidly spreading the envelopes out
on the table, he suddenly put his finger on an address.

"here you are, r. etherwick," he exclaimed.  "hats ust what I
expected to find outthough I certainly didnt think we should
discover it so quickly his man has lived at ellithwaite some time or
other.  ook there, at this addressr. ames ranett, , ictoria
errace, ellithwaite, orkshire.  Of coursethats how he came to
know and be with annaford.  hey were old acquaintances.  ee, there
are several letters."

etherwick took two or three of the envelopes in his hand and looked
closely at them.  e perceived at once what atherfield had not noticed.

"ust so" he said.  "But whats of far more importance is the date.
ook at thisyou see  hat shows that ranett was living at
ellithwaite ten years agoit was of that time that annaford was
talking to him in the train."

"Oh, were getting at something" assented atherfield.  "ow well put
everything back, and Ill take this box away and examine it thoroughly
at leisure."  e replaced the various articles, twisted a cord round
the box, knotted it, and turned to the dead mans clothes, lying neatly
folded on a chair close by.  "I havent had a look at the pockets of
those things yet," he continued.  "Ill ust take a glanceyou never
know."

etherwick again watched in silence.  here was little of interest
revealed until atherfield suddenly drew a folded bit of paper from one
of the waistcoat pockets.  moothing it out he uttered a sharp
exclamation.

"ood" he said.  "ee this  A brand new five pound note  ow, Ill
lay anything he hadnt had that on him long  ot it that night,
doubtless.  Andfrom whom"

"I should say annaford gave it to him," suggested etherwick.

But atherfield shook his head and put the note in his own pocket.

"hats a definite clue" he said, with emphasis.  "I can trace that"




A I

 II BO

etherwick went away from the sordid atmosphere of ligwoods ents
wondering more than ever at this new development he continued to
wonder and to speculate all the rest of that day and most of the next.
hat ranetts sudden death had followed on annafords seemed to him a
sure proof that there was more behind this mystery than anybody had so
far conceived of.  ersonally, he had not the slightest doubt that
whoever poisoned annaford had also poisoned ranett.  And he was not
at all surprised when, late in the afternoon of the day following upon
that of the visit to orking, atherfield walked into his chambers with
a face full of news.

"I know what youre going to tell me, atherfield," said etherwick,
motioning his visitor to an easy chair.  "he doctors have held a
postmortem on ranett, and they find that he was poisoned."

atherfields face fell he was robbed of his chance of a dramatic
announcement.

"Well, and thats ust what I was going to tell you," he answered.
"hats what they do say.  ame doctors that performed the autopsy on
annaford.  oesnt surprise you"

"ot in the least," replied etherwick.  "I expected it.  heyre sure
of it"

"ead certain  But, as in annafords case, theyre not certain of the
particular poison used.  oweveralso as in his casetheyve
submitted the whole case to two big swells in that line, one of em the
man thats always employed by the ome Office in these affairs, and the
other that famous specialist at t. arthas ospitalI forget his
name.  heyll get to work theyre at work on the annaford case now.
ifficult ob, I understandsome very subtle poison, probably little
known.  owever, I believe weve got a clue about it."

"A clueabout the poison" exclaimed etherwick.  "What clue"

"Well, this," answered atherfield.  "After youd gone away from
ligwoods ents yesterday afternoon, and while I was making
arrangements for the removal of the poor chaps body, I took another
careful look round the room.  ow, if you noticed things as closely as
all that, you may have observed that ranetts bed was partly in a sort
of alcovethe head part.  In the corner of that alcove, or recess,
ust where he could have set them down by reaching his arm out of bed,
I found a bottle and a glass tumbler.  he bottle was an ordinary
medicine bottlenot a very big one.  It had the cork in it and about
an inch of fluid, which, on taking out the cork, I found to be whisky,
and, I should say by the smell, whisky of very good quality.  But I
noticed that there was the very slightest trace of some sort of
sediment at the bottom.  here was a trace of similar sediment in the
bottom of the tumbler.  ow, of course, I put these things up most
carefully, sealed them, and handed them over to the doctors.  or it
was very evident to mereconstructing things, you knowthat ranett
had mixed himself a drink, a nightcap, if you like to call it so, from
that bottle on getting into bed, and then had put bottle and glass down
by his bedhead, in the corner.  And ust as I mean to trace that
fivepound note, r. etherwick, so I mean to trace that bottle"

"ow" asked etherwick, closely interested.  "And to what, or whom"

"o the chemists where it came from," answered atherfield.  "It came
from some chemists, and Ill find which"

"here are hundreds of chemists in ondon," said etherwick.  "Its a
stiff proposition."

"Its going to be done, anyway," asserted atherfield.  "And it maynt
be such a stiff ob as it at first looks to be.  ee here  here were
labels on that bottle, both of em torn and defaced, its true, but
still with enough on them to narrow down the field of inquiry.  Ive
had the face of the bottle photographedheres a print of the result."

e brought out a photographic print, roughly finished and mounted on a
card, and handed it over to etherwick, who took it to the light and
examined it carefully.  It showed the front of the medicine bottle,
with a label at the top and another at the bottom.  ach had been torn,
as if to obliterate names and addresses, but a good deal of the
lettering was left.



    
        . A     , sq.,         
        he mix  re as before    
        o. A.               
    

    
      ote.his medicine has 
      been dispensed by a fully  
      qualified hemist with the 
              to possible drugs  
                  is guaranteed  
                      wishes of  
                      the res  
                                 
                      ...     
                        t. W.. 
    


"hat bottom labels the thing, r. etherwick," remarked atherfield.
"et me get that hiatus filled up with the name and address of the
chemist, and Ill soon find out who . A. blank, squire, is  he
chemist is one in the West entral district hes a member of the
harmaceutical ociety hell have somebody whose initials are . A. on
his books hell recognise the number A. of the prescription.  Its
a decided clue and even if there are, as there undoubtedly are, scores
of chemists in the West entral district, Ill run this one down"

etherwick handed back the photograph and began to pace up and down the
room.  uddenly he turned on his visitor, his mind made up to tell him
what he himself had been doing.

"atherfield," he said, dropping into his chair again and adopting a
tone of confidence, "what do you make of this  I meanwhats your
theory  Is it your opinion that the deaths of these two men areso to
speakall of a piece"

"hat is my opinion" answered atherfield with an emphatic nod.  "Ive
no more doubt about it than I have that I see you, r. etherwick.  All
of a piece, to be sure  Whoever poisoned annaford poisoned ranett
Ill tell you how Ive figured it out since the doctors told me, only a
couple of hours since, what their opinion is about ranett.  his way
annaford and ranett knew each other at ellithwaite ten years ago.
hat night when ranett left Appleyard in orseferry oad and turned
into ictoria treet, he met annafordaccidentally."

"Why accidentally" asked etherwick.

"Well, thats what I think," said atherfield.  "Ive figured in that
way.  Of course, it may have been by appointment.  But anyway, they
metwe know that.  ow then, where did they spend their time between
then and the time they got into your carriage at t. amess ark  We
dont know.  But here comes in an unknown factorwhat about the
strange man at ictoria, the man muffled to his eyes  wo things
suggest themselves to me, r. etherwick.  id annaford take ranett
to see that man, or did annaford and ranett meet at that mans  or
I think that man, whoever he is, is at the bottom of every thing."

"Why should they meet at that mans" asked etherwick.



"Well," answered atherfield, "I think that secret of annafords has
something to do with it.  e had the sealed packet on him when he left
alters otel it had disappeared when we searched his clothing after
his death.  ow, the granddaughter says it had to do with chemicals.
uppose the tall, muffled man was a chap whose business opinion on this
secret annaford wanted, and that they met at ictoria and went to the
mans rooms somewhere in that district  uppose ranettanother man
in the chemistry linecame there, knowing both  upposing the muffled
man poisoned both of em, to keep the secret to himself  o you see
what Im after  ery well  here you are.  he thing is to hunt out
that man, whoever he is.  I wish I knew what annafords secret was,
thoughits precise nature."

"atherfield," said etherwick, "Ill tell you  ouve been very
confidential with me Ill be equally so with you, on condition that we
work together from this.  he fact is, Ive been at work.  Im
immensely interested in this case.  ver since I saw annaford die in
that train and in that awfully mysterious fashion its fascinated me,
and Im going to the very end of it.  ow Ill tell you all Ive been
doing, and what Ive discovered.  isten carefully."

e went on to tell his visitor the whole details of his visit to
ellithwaite, of the results of his investigations there, and of
honas doings and observations at iversreade ourt.  atherfield
listened in absorbed silence.

"Is iss annaford going to this secretaryship, then" he demanded
abruptly, at the end of etherwicks story.  "Is it settled"

"ractically, yes," replied etherwick.  "I heard from ady iversreade
this morning so did r. enthwaite.  We gave iss annafordto be
known to ady iversreade as iss eatherstonevery good
recommendations for the post, and I expect that as soon as shes had
our letters, ady iversreade will telephone to iss annaford that
shes to go at once.  henshell go."

"o act asspy" suggested atherfield.

"If you put it that way, yes," assented etherwick.  "hough, from what
she saw of her yesterday, iss annaford formed a very favourable
opinion of ady iversreade.  owever, Im so certain that somehow or
other, perhaps innocently, shes connected with this affair, that we
mustnt lose any chance."

"And iss annaford will report anything likely to you" asked
atherfield.

"ust so  iss annafords duties dont include any unday work on
unday shell come to town, and if theres anything to tell, shell
tell itto me.  hes a smart, clever girl, atherfield, and shell
keep her eyes open."

atherfield nodded, and for a while sat silent, evidently lost in his
own thoughts.

"Oh, shes a clever girl, right enough" he said suddenly.  "m  I
wonder who this ady iversreade really is, now"

"his ady iversreade" laughed etherwick.  "A multimillionairess"

"Aye, ust so but who was she before her marriage  If she is the
woman who was known as rs. Whittingham"

"an there be any doubt about it after what I found out"

"ou never know, r. etherwick  ord bless you they talk about the
long arm of coincidence.  Why, in my time Ive known of things that
make me feel theres nothing wonderful about the most amazing
coincidence  Butif ady iversreade used to be rs. Whittingham,
then Id like to know all about rs. Whittingham until she became ady
iversreade, and who she was before she was rs. Whittingham, if she
ever was rs. Whittingham"

"tiff ob, atherfield," said etherwick.  "I think we shall have
enough to do to keep an eye on ady iversreade."

"ou anticipate something there" suggested atherfield.

"I think something may transpire," replied etherwick.

atherfield got to his feet.

"Well," he said, "keep me informed, and Ill keep you informed.  Weve
something to go onord knows what we shall make out of it"

"oure doing your best to trace the tall man" asked etherwick.

"Best" exclaimed atherfield with an air of disgust.  "Weve done our
best and our better than best  Ive had special men all round that
ictoria district I should think every tall man in that parts been
eyed over.  And I believe that r. edbitter has so got the thing on
his brain that hes been spending all his spare time patrolling the
neighbourhood and going in and out of restaurants and saloons looking
for the man he sawof course, without result"

"All the same," said etherwick, "that man issomewhere"

atherfield went away, and except at the inquest on ranettwhereat
nothing transpired which was not already knownetherwick did not see
him again for several days.  e himself progressed no further in his
investigations during that time.  hona annaford betook herself to
iversreade ourt, as secretary to its mistresss ome, and until the
unday succeeding his departure etherwick heard nothing of her.  hen
she came up to town on the unday morning and, in accordance with their
previous arrangement, etherwick met her at ictoria, and took her to
lunch at a neighbouring hotel.

"Anything to tell" he asked, when they had settled down to their soup.
"Any happenings"

"othing" answered hona.  "verything exceedingly proper,
businesslike, and orderly.  And ady iversreade appears to me to be a
model sort of personher devotion to that ome and its inmates is
remarkable  I dont believe anythings going to happen, or that I
shall ever have anything to report."

"Well, thatll have its compensations," said etherwick.  "eave us all
the more time for ourselves, wont it"

e gave her a look to which hona responded, shyly but unmistakably
she knew, as well as he did, that they were getting fond of each
others society.  And they continued to meet on undays, and three or
four went by, and still she had nothing to tell that related to the
mystery of annaford and ranett.

hree weeks elapsed before atherfield had anything to tell, either.
hen he walked into etherwicks chambers one morning with news in his
face.

"raced it" he said.  "new I should  hat fivepound notebrand
new.  Only a question of time to do that, of course."

"Well" inquired etherwick.

"It was one of twenty fivers paid by the cashier of the ondon and
ountry Bank in iccadilly to the secretary of ivians," continued
atherfield.  "ateday before annafords death.  ivians, let me
tell you, is a swell night club.  ow then, how did that note get into
the hands of ranett  hats going to be a stiff un"

"o stiff that Im afraid you mustnt ask me to go in at it," agreed
etherwick goodhumouredly.  "I must stick to my own linewhen the
chance comes."

he chance came on the following unday, when, in pursuance of now
established custom, he met hona.  he gave him a significant look as
soon as she got out of the train.

"ewsat last" she said, as they turned up the platform.
"omethings happenedbut what it means I dont know."




A 

 IO IIO

he headwaiter in the restaurant to which etherwick and hona
repaired every unday immediately upon her arrival now knew these two
well by sight, and forming his own conclusions about them, always
reserved for them a table in a quiet and secluded corner.  ither they
now proceeded, and had scarcely taken their accustomed seats before
hona plunged into her story.

"I expect you want to know what its all about, so I wont keep you
waiting," she said.  "It was on ridayriday morningthat it
happened, and I half thought of writing to you about it that evening.
hen I thought it best to tell you personally todaybesides, I should
have had to write an awfully long letter.  here are things to explain
Id better explain them first.  Our arrangements down there at
iversreade, for instance.  heyre like this ady iversreade and I
always breakfast together at the ourt, about nine oclock.  At ten we
go across the grounds to the ome.  here we have a sort of formal
officetwo rooms, one of which, the first opening from the hall, I
have, the other, opening out of it, is ady iversreades private
sanctum.  In the hall itself we have an exarmy man, itchell, as
hallporter, to attend to the door and so on.  All the morning we are
busy with letters, accounts, reports of the staff, and that sort of
thing.  We have lunch at the ome, and were generally busy until four
or five oclock.  ot all that"

"very scrap" replied etherwick.  "erfectly plain."

"ery well," continued hona.  "One more detail, however.  A good many
people, chiefly medical men and folk interested in homes and hospitals,
call, wanting to look over and to know about the placewhich, I may
tell you in parenthesis, costs ady iversreade a pretty tidy penny
itchells instructions as regards all callers are to bring their cards
to meI interview them first if I can deal with them, I do if I
think it necessary or desirable, I take them in to ady iversreade.
We have to sort them outsome, I am sure, come out of mere idle
curiosity in fact, the only visitors we want to see there are either
medical men who have a genuine interest in the place and can do
something for it, or people who are connected with its particular
inmates.  Well, on riday morning last, about a quarter to twelve, as I
was busy with my letters, I heard a car come up the drive, and
presently itchell came into my room with a card bearing the name r.
yprian Baseverie.  Instead of being an engraved card as, by all the
recognised standards, it should have been, it was a printed cardthat
was the first thing I noticed."

"our powers of observation," remarked etherwick admiringly, "are
excellent, and should prove most useful."

"hank you for the complimentbut that didnt need much observation,"
retorted hona with a laugh.  "It was obvious.  owever, I asked
itchell what r. Baseverie wanted itchell replied that the gentleman
desired an interview with ady iversreade.  ow, as I said before, we
never refuse doctors, so I told itchell to bring r. Baseverie to me.
A moment later r. Baseverie entered.  I want to describe him
particularly, and you must listen most attentively.  igure, then, to
yourself a man of medium height, neither stout nor slender, but
comfortably plump, and apparently about fortyfive years of age,
dressed very correctly and fashionably in a black morning coat and
vest, dark striped trousers, immaculate as to linen and neckwear, and
furnished with a new silk hat, pearlgrey gloves and a tightly rolled
goldmounted umbrella.  Incidentally, he wore a thin gold watchchain,
white spats and highly polished shoes.  ot that"

"I see himhis clothes and things, I mean," assented etherwick.
"ashionable medico sort, evidently  Buthimself"

"ow his face," continued hona.  "Imagine a man with an almost
absolutely bloodless countenancea face the colour of old
ivorylighted by a pair of peculiarly piercing eyes, black as sloes,
and the pallor of the face heightened by a rather heavy black moustache
and equally black, slightly crinkled hair, thick enough above the ears
but becoming sparse and thin on the crown.  Imagine, too, a pair of
full, red lips above a round but determined chin and a decidedly hooked
nose, and you havethe man Im describing"

"m" said etherwick reflectingly.  "ebraic, I think, from your
description."

"hats ust what I thought myself," agreed hona.  "I said to myself
at once, Whatever and whoever else you are, my friend, youre a ew
But the creatures manner and speech were nglish enoughvery nglish.
e had all the wellaccustomed air of the medical practitioner who is
also a bit of a man of the world, and I saw at once that anybody who
tried to fence with him would usually come off secondbest.  is
explanation of his presence was reasonable and commonplace enough he
was deeply interested in the sort of cases we had in the ome, and
desired to acquaint himself with our methods and arrangements and so
on.  e made use of a few technical terms and phrases which were quite
beyond my humble powers, and I carried in his card to ady iversreade.
ady iversreade is always accessible when theres a doctor in the
case, and in two minutes r. Baseverie was closeted with her."

"hat ends the first chapter, I suppose" said etherwick.
"Interestingvery  A good curtain  And the next"

"he events of the second chapter," replied hona, "took place in ady
iversreades room, and I cannot even guess at their nature.  I can
only tell of things that I know.  But theres a good deal in that.  o
begin with, although r. Baseverie had said to me that he desired to
see the omewhich, of course, in the ordinary way meant his being
either taken round by ady iversreade or by our resident house
physicianhe was not taken round.  e never left that room from the
moment he entered it until the moment in which he left it.  And he
remained in it an entire hour"

"With ady iversreade"

"With ady iversreade  he never left it, either.  or did I go into
it she hates me to go in if she has anybody with her at any time.
othere those two were together, from ten minutes to twelve until
five minutes to one.  et the man had said that he wanted to look
round"

"Is there any other way by which they could have left that room"
suggested etherwick.  "Another dooror a rench window"

"here is nothing of the sort.  he door into my room is the only means
of entrance or exit to or from ady iversreades.  othey were there
all the time."

"id you hear anything"

"othing  he house in which ady iversreade set up this ome is an
old, solid, wellbuilt onenone of your modern gimcrack work in
itits a far better house than the ourt, grand as that may be.  All
the doors and windows fitI never heard a sound from the room."

"Well," asked etherwick, after due meditation, "and at the end of the
hour"

"At the end of the hour the door suddenly opened and r. Baseverie
appeared, hat, gloves and umbrella in hand.  e half turned as he came
out and said a few words to ady iversreade.  I heard them.  e said,
Well, then, next riday morning at the same time  hen he nodded,
stepped into my room, closed the door behind him, made me a very
polite, smiling bow as he passed my desk, and went out.  A moment later
he drove off in the carit had been waiting at the entrance all that
time."

"I suppose thats the end of chapter two," suggested etherwick.  "Is
there more"

"ome," responded hona.  "uring the hour which r. Baseverie had
spent with ady iversreade I had been very busy typing letters.  When
he had gone I took them into her room, so that she could sign them.  I
suppose I was a bit curious about what had ust happened and may have
been more than usually observantanyway, I felt certain that the visit
of this man, whoever he is, had considerably upset ady iversreade.
he looked it."

"recisely how" inquired etherwick.

"Well, I couldnt exactly tell you.  erhaps a man wouldnt have
noticed it.  But being a woman, I did.  he was perturbedshed been
annoyed, or distressed, or surprised, orsomething.  I saw signs
which, as a woman, were unmistakableto a woman.  he mans visit had
been distastefultroubling.  Im as certain of that as I am that this
is roast mutton."

"id she say anything"

"ot one word.  he was unusually taciturnsilent, in fact.  he took
the letters in silence, signed them in silence.  o, on reflection, she
never spoke a word while I was in the room.  I took the letters away
and began putting them in their envelopes.  oon afterwards ady
iversreade came through my room and went out, and I saw her go across
the grounds to the ourt.  he didnt turn up at the usual luncheon at
the ome, and I didnt see her again that afternoon.  In fact, I didnt
see her again that day, for when I went home to the ourt at five
oclock, ady iversreades maid told me that her mistress had gone up
to town and wouldnt be home until late that night.  I went to bed
before she returned."

"ext morning" suggested etherwick.

"ext morning she was ust as usual, and things went on in the usual
way."

"id she ever mention this man and his visit to you" asked etherwick.

"onot a word of him.  But I found out something about him myself on
riday afternoon."

"What  omething relevant"

"ay be relevant tosomething.  I was wondering about himand his
printed card.  I thought it odd that a medical man, so smartly dressed
and all that, should present a card like thatnot one well printed, a
cheap thing  Besides, it had no address.  I wonderedmere
inquisitiveness, perhapswhere the creature came from.  ow, weve a
olly good lot of the usual referencebooks there at the omeand
theres a firstclass right uptodate medical directory amongst them.
o I looked up the name of r. yprian Baseverie.  I say, looked it
upbut I didnt do thatfor it wasnt there  es neither an
nglish, nor a cottish, nor an Irish medical man."

"oreigner, then," said etherwick.  "rench, perhaps, orAmerican."

"ay be an gyptian, or a ersian, or a urasian, for anything I know,"
remarked hona.  "What I know is that hes not on the list in that
directory, though from his speech and manner youd think hed been
practising in the West nd all his life  Anyway, thats the story.  Is
there anything in it"

etherwick picked up his glass of claret by its stem and looked
thoughtfully through the contents of the bowl.

"he particular thing isthe extent and quality of ady iversreades
annoyance, or dismay, or perturbation, occasioned by the mans visit,"
he said at last.  "If she was really very much upset"

"If you want my honest opinion as eyewitness and as woman," remarked
hona, "ady iversreade was very much upset.  he gave me the
impression that shed ust received very bad, disconcerting, unpleasant
news.  After seeing and watching her as she signed the letters I had no
doubt whatever that the man had deliberately lied to me when he said he
wanted to see the ome and its workingwhat he really wanted was
access to ady iversreade."

"ook here" exclaimed etherwick suddenly "Were you present when this
man went into ady iversreades room"

"resent  Of course I was  I took him inmyself."

"ou saw them meet"

"o be sure"

"Well, then, you know  Were they strangers  id she recognise him
id she show any sign of recognition whatever when she set eyes on him"

"o, none  Im perfectly certain shed never seen the man before in
her life  I could see quite well that he was an absolute stranger to
her."

"And she to him"

"Oh, that I dont know  e may have seen her a thousand times.  But
Im sure shed never seen him."

etherwick laid down his knife and fork with a gesture of finality.

"Im going to find out who that chap is," he answered.  "ot to"

"ou think his visit may have something to do with this" asked hona.

"ay, yes.  Anyway, Im not going to let any chance go.  heres enough
mystery in what you tell me about the man to make it worth while
following him up.  It must be done."

"ow will you do it"

"ou say he said that he was going there again next riday at the same
time  Well, the thing to do, then, is to watch and follow him when he
goes away."

"Im afraid Im no use for that  ed know me."

"or am IIm too conspicuous," laughed etherwick.  "If I were a
head and shoulders shorter, I might be some use.  But Ive got the very
manmy clerk, one apperley.  es ust the sort to follow and dog
anybody and yet never be seen himself.  As youll say, when youve the
pleasure of seeing him, apperleys the most ordinary, commonplace chap
you ever set eyes onpass absolutely unnoticed in any ockney crowd.
But hes as sharp as they make em, veiling a peculiar astuteness under
his eminently undistinguished features.  And what I shall do is
thisIll give apperley a full and detailed description of r.
yprian Baseverie Ive memorised yours already apperley will
memorise mine.  ow Baseverie, whoever he may be, will probably go down
to orking by the . from here so will apperley.  And after
apperley has once spotted his man, hell not lose sight of him."

"And hell dowhat" asked hona.

"ollow him to orkingwatch himfollow him back to ondonfind out
where he goes when he returnsrun him to earth, in fact.  hen hell
report to meand we shall know more than we do now, and also what to
do next."

"I wonder what its all going to lead to" said hona.  "retty much of
a maze, isnt it"

"It is," agreed etherwick.  "But if we can only get a firm hold on a
thread"

"And that might break" she laughed.

"Well, then, one that wont break," he said.  "here are several loose
ends lying about already.  atherfields got a hold on one or two."

e went to see atherfield next morning and told him the story that he
had heard from hona.  atherfield grew thoughtful.

"Well, r. etherwick," he said, after a pause, "its as Ive said
beforeif this ady iversreade is mixed up in it, the thing to do is
to go back and get as full a history as can possibly be got of her
antecedents.  Well have to get on to thatbut well wait to see what
that clerk of yours discovers about this man.  here may be something
in itin the meantime Im hard at work on my own clues."

"Any luck" asked etherwick.

"carcely that.  But, as I say, were at work.  he fivepound note is
a difficult matter.  iven in change, of course, at ivians ight
lubbut they tell me there that its no uncommon thing to change ten,
twenty, and even fiftypound notes for their customersits a swell
lot who forgather thereand of course theyve no recollection whatever
about that particular note or night.  till, the fact remainsthat
note came through ivians, and through one of its frequenters, to
ranett, and Im in hopes."

"And the medicine bottle" suggested etherwick.

"Ah, there is more chance" responded atherfield, with a lightening
eye.  "hats only a question of time  Ive got a man going round all
the chemists in the West entral districtstiff ob, for there are
more of em than I believed.  But hes bound to hit on the right one
eventually.  And thenwell, we shall have a pretty good idea, if not
positive proof, as to how ranett got hold of the stuff that poisoned
him."

"I suppose theres no doubt that there was poison in that bottle"
inquired etherwick.

"According to the specialists, none," replied atherfield.  "And in the
glass too.  What sort of poison, I dont knowyou know what these
experts areso mysterious about things  But they have told me
thisthe stuff that settled ranett was identical with that which
finished off annaford.  hats certain."

"hen it probably came from the same source," said etherwick.

"Oh, my notion is that the man or men who poisoned one man poisoned the
other," exclaimed atherfield.  "And at the same time.  At least, I
think ranett got his dose at the same timeprobably carried it off in
his pocket and drank it when he got home.  Butwe shall trace that
bottle  et me know what you find out about this man Baseverie, r.
etherwickevery little helps."

etherwick duly coached apperley in the part he wanted him to play,
and apperley, with money in his pockets and a pipe in his mouth,
lounged off to ictoria on the following riday morning.  is principal
saw nothing and heard nothing of him all that day.




A I

A IA

As etherwick was breakfasting next morning, apperley, outwardly
commonplace and phlegmatic as ever, walked into his room.

"Brief outline first, apperley," commanded etherwick, instinctively
scenting news.  "etails later.  Well"

"potted him at once at ictoria," said apperley.  "ollowed him down
there.  e was at iversreade an hour.  hen went back to orkinghad
lunch at ed ion.  e stopped there till four oclock, lunching and
idling.  Went back to town by the ., arriving ..  I followed him
then to the af de aris.  e dined there and hung about till past
ten.  And then he went to ivians ight lub."

etherwick pricked up his ears at that.  ivians ight lubhere, at
any rate, seemed to be a link in the chain of which atherfield
believed himself to hold at least one end.  he fivepound note found
on ranett had been traced to ivians ight lub now apperley had
tracked ady iversreades mysterious visitor to the same resort.

"o ivians ight lub, eh, apperley" he said.  "ets seewhere
is that"

"ntrance is in andlestick assage, off t. artins ane," replied
apperley with promptitude.  "lubs on first floorolly fine suite
of rooms, too"

"ouve been in it" suggested etherwick.

"wice  ot last night, though.  ou didnt give me any further orders
than to see where he went finally, after returning to town.  o, when
Id run him to earth at ivians, I went home.  I argued that if he was
wanted further, ivians would find him."

"All right, apperley.  But before that  ou followed him to
iversreade ourt"

apperley grinned widely.

"oI did better than that.  I was there before himmuch better
that, than following.  I spotted him quick enough at ictoria, and made
sure he got into the ..  hen I got in.  As soon as we got to
orking, I umped out, got outside the station and chartered a taxi and
drove off to iversreade ourt.  I made the driver hide his cab up the
road I laid low in the plantation opposite the entrance gates.
resently my lord came along and drove up to the house.  e was there
the best part of an hour then he drove off again towards orking.  I
followed at a good distance kept him in sight, all the same.  e got
out of his conveyance in the igh treet so did I.  e went into the
ed ion so did I.  e had lunch there so had I.  After that he
lounged about in the smokingroom I kept an eye on him."

"I suppose he didnt meet anybody"

"obody"

"Well, and at the af de aris  id he meet anybody there"

"e exchanged a nod and a word here and there with menand womenthat
came in and went out.  But as to any arranged meeting, I should say
not.  I should say, too, that he was well known at the af de aris."

"id he seem to be a man of means  ou know what I mean"

"e did himself very well at lunch and dinner, anyway," said apperley,
with another grin.  "Bottle of claret at orking, and a pint of
champagne at the af de arisbig cigars, too.  hat sort of man, you
know."

etherwick considered matters a moment.

"ow do you get in to this ivians ight lub" he asked suddenly.

"ay" answered apperley laconically.  "At the door.  ome nonsense
about being proposed, but thats all bosh  wo of you gosay Brown
and mith.  Brown proposes mith and mith proposes Brown.  All rot
Anybody can get inwith money."

"And what goes on there"

"ancing  rinking  evilry  uite respectable, though," replied
apperley.  "Been no prosecutions, anywayso far."

"What time does it open"

"ine oclock," answered apperley, with a suggestive grin.  "In the
old days it didnt open till after the theatres.  But nowearlier."

"eally not a nightclub at allin the old acceptation of the term,"
suggested etherwick.  "vening, really"

"hats about it," agreed apperley.  "Anyhow, its ivians."

or the second time in the course of his investigations, etherwicks
thoughts turned to Boxley.  Boxleys love of intimate acquaintance with
all sides of ondon life had doubtless led him to look in at ivians
he would ask Boxley for some further information.  And he looked up
Boxley at the club.

Boxley knew ivians well enoughinnocent and innocuous now, said
Boxley, what with all these new regulations and so on degenerated,
indeedor improved, ust whichever way you regarded itinto a supper
club and that sort of thing.  ancingoh yes, there was dancing, and
so onbut things had alteredaltered.

"Well, I dont want to dance there, nor to go there at all, for that
matter, unless Im obliged to," said etherwick.  "What I want to know
is something about a man who, I believe, frequents the placea
somewhat notable man."

"escribe him" commanded Boxley.

etherwick retailed honas description of Baseverie Boxley nodded.

"I know that manby sight," he said.  "een him there.  I believe hes
something to do with the proprietorship that place is owned by a small
syndicate.  But I dont know his name.  Ive seen him outside
tooround about eicester quare and its purlieus."

etherwick went from Boxley to atherfield and told him the result of
apperleys work.

"I know ivians, of course," said atherfield.  "Been in there two or
three times lately in relation to this fivepound note.  ont remember
seeing this man, though.  But in view of what your clerk says, Id like
to see him.  ome with me.  Well go tonight."

"ake it onday," suggested etherwick.  "omorrow, unday, I shall be
meeting iss annaford again, and before we go to ivians Id like to
know if she has anything to tell about the last visit of Baseverie to
iversreade ourtthe visit that apperley watched yesterday.  he may
have."

"onday night then," agreed atherfield.  "I dont know what we can
expect, but Id certainly like to know who this man is and why he goes
to ady iversreade."

"o good, you may be sure" said etherwick.  "But well ferret it
outsomehow."

"Odd, that things seem to be centring round ivians" mused
atherfield.  "he fiverand now this.  Wellonday evening
thenperhaps iss annaford can supply a bit of extra news tomorrow."

etherwick, meeting hona at ictoria next day, found his arm grasped
in honas right hand and himself twisted round.

"If you want to see ady iversreade in the flesh, there she is"
whispered hona.  "ame up by the same trainthere, going towards the
bookstall a tall man with her"

At that moment ady iversreade turned to speak to a porter who was
carrying some light luggage for her, and etherwick had a full and good
view of her face and figure.  A fine, handsome, capablelooking woman,
he said to himself, and one that once seen would not easily be
forgotten.

"Whos the man" he asked, looking from ady iversreade to her
companion, a tall, bronzed man of military appearance, and apparently
of about her own age.

"aor enteney," replied hona promptly.  "es a friend of hers, who
takes a tremendous interest in the omein fact, he acts as a sort of
representative of it here in town.  es often down at the ourtI
believe hes in love with her."

"Wellmatched couple," observed etherwick, as the two people under
notice moved away towards the exit.  "And whats ady iversreade come
up for"

"Oh, I dont know that," replied hona.  "he never tells me anything
about her private doings.  I heard her say that she was going to own
this morning and shouldnt be back until uesday, but thats all I
know."

"hat man, Baseverie, came again on riday" suggested etherwick.
"But I know he didapperley watched him.  Anything happen"

"othingexcept that ady iversreade told me that if r. Baseverie
called he was to be brought in to her at once," answered hona.  "e
came at the same time as before, and was with her an hour."

"Any signs on her part of being further upset" asked etherwick.

"oon the contrary she seemed quite cool and collected after hed
gone," said hona.  "Of course she made no reference to his visit."

"as she never mentioned him to you"

"ever  In spite of the fact that his professed obect was to see the
ome and the patients, hes seen neither."

"Which shows that that was all a mere excuse to get speech with her"
muttered etherwick.  "Wellwere going to find out who this r.
Baseverie is  atherfield and I intend to get in touch with him
tomorrow night."

But when the next night came etherwicks plans about the visit to
ivians were frustrated by an unexpected happening, and neither he nor
atherfield as much as crossed the threshold of the nightclub in
andlestick assage.  hey went there at ten oclock that, said
atherfield, was a likely hourbetween then and eleventhirty the
place would be full of its habitual frequenters the notion was to
mingle unobtrusively with whatever crowd chanced to be there and to
keep eyes and ears open for whatever happened to transpire.

andlestick assage, unfamiliar to etherwick until that evening,
proved to be one of the many narrow alleys which open out of t.
artins ane in the neighbourhood of the theatres.  It wore a very
commonplace, not to say shabby complexion, and there was nothing in its
atmosphere to suggest adventure or romance.  ot was there anything
alluring about the entrance to ivians, which was merely a wide,
double doorway, ornamented by two evergreen shrubs set in tubs and
revealing swingdoors within, and a carpeted staircase beyond.
etherwick and atherfield, however, never reached swingdoors or
staircase as they approached the outer entrance a tall woman emerged,
and without so much as a look right or left turned down the passage
towards the street.  he paid no attention to the two men as she walked
quickly past thembut etherwick softly seized his companions arm.

"ady iversreade, by all thats wonderful" he exclaimed under his
breath.  "hat woman"

atherfield turned sharply, gazing after the retreating figure.

"hat," he said incredulously, "coming out of here  ertain"

"ead sure" affirmed etherwick.  "I knew her at onceId had a
particularly good look at her, yesterday.  hats she"

"Whats she doing at ivians" muttered atherfield.  "ueer, that"

"But shes going away from it," said etherwick.  "ome onlets see
where she goes.  We can easily come back here.  But why not follow her
first"

"ood" agreed atherfield.  "ome on then easily keep her in sight."

ady iversreade at that moment was turning out of the passage, to her
left hand.  When the two men emerged from it, she was already several
yards ahead, going towards t. artins hurch.  er tall figure made
her good to follow, but atherfield kept etherwick back no use, he
said, in pressing too closely on your quarry.

"all as she is and tall as we are," he whispered, as they threaded in
out of the crowds on the pavement, "we can spot her at twenty yards.
autiously, nowshes making for the cab rank"

hey watched ady iversreade charter and enter a taxicab in another
minute it moved away.  But it had scarcely moved when atherfield was
at the door of the next cab on the rank.

"ou saw that cab go off with a tall woman in it" he said to the
driver.  "hereust rounding the corner, know its driver
ightfollow it carefully.  ote where it stops, and if the woman
gets out.  rive slowly past wherever that is, and then pull up a bit
farther on.  Be sharp, nowthis is" he bent towards the man and
whispered a word or two a second later he and etherwick were in the
cab and across the top side of rafalgar quare.

"his is getting a bit thick, r. etherwick," remarked atherfield.
"our clerk tracks his man to ivians on riday night, we find ady
iversreade coming out of ivians on onday night.  ow I shouldnt
think ady iversreade, whom we hear of chiefly as a humanitarian, a
likely sort of lady to visit ivians"

"he came out of ivians, anyway" replied etherwick.

"hen, of course, shed been in" said atherfield.  "But why  I
should sayto have a meeting with Baseverie, or with somebody
representing him, or having something to do with the business that took
him to iversreade ourt.  What business is it  as it anything to do
with our business  owever, theres ady iversreade in that cab in
front, and well ust follow her to find out where she goesno doubt
shes bound for some swell West nd hotel.  And that knowledge will be
useful, for I may want to see her in the morningto ask a question or
two."

"omewhat early for that, isnt it" suggested etherwick.  "o we know
enough"

"epends on what you call enough," replied atherfield dryly.  "What I
know is this that man ranett was poisoned.  e had on him a brand new
fivepound note.  hat note Ive traced as far as ivians, where it
was certainly paid to some customer in change on the very day before
ranett and annafords deaths ivians is accordingly a place of
interest.  ow I hear of a mysterious man visiting ady
iversreadethe man is tracked to iviansI myself see ady
iversreade emerging from ivians.  I think I must ask ady
iversreade what she knows about ivians and a certain r. Baseverie,
and, incidentally, if she ever heard of a place called ellithwaite and
a policesuperintendent named annaford  h  But were leaving the
region of the fashionable hotels."

etherwick looked out of the window, what he saw seemed unfamiliar.

"Were going up dgware oad," said atherfield.  e leaned out of the
cab and gave some further instructions to the driver.  "I dont want to
arouse any suspicion there in front," he remarked, dropping into his
seat again.  "he probability is that shes going to some private
house, and I dont want her to get any idea that shes followed.
Ahnow we turn into arrow oad."

he cab went away by addington reen, turned sharply at the own all,
and made up t. arys errace.  resently it slowed down proceeded
still more slowly passed the other cab which had come to a standstill
in front of a block of high buildings a few yards farther on it
stopped altogether.  he driver got down from his seat and came to the
door.

"hat tall lady" he said confidentially.  "er as got into the other
cab.  hes gone into t. arys ansionsust below."

"lats, arent they" asked atherfield.

"hats it, sir," answered the driver.  e looked down the street.
"abs going off again, sir.  orter came out and paid."

"hat looks as if she was going to stay here awhile," remarked
atherfield in an undertone.  "Well, well get out, too, and take a
look round."  e paid and dismissed the driver, and crossing over to
the opposite side of the roadway, pointed out to etherwick the block
of flats into which ady iversreade had disappeared.  "Big place," he
muttered.  "egular rabbitwarren.  owever, no other entrance than
thisthe old burial grounds at the back, no way out there, I do know
that  o she cant very well vanish that way."

"oure going to wait, then" asked etherwick.

"I dont believe in starting out on any game unless I see it through,"
replied atherfield.  "es, I think well wait.  But theres no
necessity to hang around in the open street.  I know this
districtused to be at the police station round the corner.  ou see
all these houses on this side, r. etherwick  heyre all
lodginghouses, and I know most of their keepers.  Wait here a minute,
and Ill soon get a room that we can watch from, without being seen
ourselves."

e left etherwick standing under the shadow of a neighbouring high
wall, and went a little way down the street.  etherwick heard him open
the gate of one of the little gardens and knock at a door.  here some
little delay.  etherwick passed the time in staring at the long rows
of lighted windows in the flats opposite, wondering to which of them
ady iversreade had gone and what she was doing there at all.  It was
clear to him that this was some adventure connected with the mysterious
Baseverie and with ivians ight lubbut how, and of what nature

atherfield came back presently, cheerful and reassuring.

"ome along, r. etherwick" he whispered.  "heres a man
herelodginghouse keeperwho knows me.  We can have his front
parlour window to watch from.  ar better that than patrolling the
street.  We shall be comfortable there."

"oure intent on watching, then" said etherwick as they moved off.

"Im not coming all that way for nothing," replied atherfield.  "Im
going to follow her up till she settles for the night.  hat wont be
here shell be off to some hotel or other before long."

But atherfields prediction proved to be faulty.  ime dragged slowly
by in the stuffy and shabby little room in which he and etherwick took
up a position and from the window of which atherfield kept a constant
watch on the entrance of the flats, exactly opposite.  idnight came
and went, but nothing happened.  And at halfpast twelve etherwick
suggested that the game wasnt worth the candle, and that he should
prefer to depart.

"ou do as you like, r. etherwick," said atherfield, stifling a
suspicious yawn.  "Im sick enough of it, too.  But here I stop till
she comes outwhether its this side of breakfast or the other side"

"And what then" asked etherwick, half derisively.

"hen well seeor Ill see, if youre goingwhere she goes next
ont believe in half measures" retorted atherfield.

"Oh, Ill see it out" said etherwick.  "After all, itll be daylight
soon."

aylight came over the housetops at four oclock.  hey had seen
nothing up to then.  But at twenty minutes to five atherfield tugged
his companions arm.  ady iversreade, in a big ulster travellingcoat
and carrying a small suitcase, was emerging alone from the opposite
door.




A II

AIA AA IO

he woman thus observed marched swiftly away down the deserted street
in the direction of the own all at the corner, and atherfield, after
one more searching look at her, dropped the slat of the enetian blind
through which he had been peeping, and turned on his companion.  At the
same instant he reached a hand for his overcoat and hat.

"ow, r. etherwick," he said sharply, "this has got to be a oneman
ob  herell be nothing extraordinary in one man going along the
streets to catch an early morning train, but it would look a bit
suspicious if two men went together on the same errand and the same
track  Im off after her  Ill run her down  Im used to that sort
of thing.  ou go to your chambers and get some sleep.  Ill look in
later and tell you what news I have.  harps the word, now"

e was out of the room and the house within the next few seconds, and
etherwick, half vexed with himself for having lingered there on a ob
which atherfield thus unceremoniously took into his own hands,
prepared to follow.  resently he went out into the shabby hall the
man of the house was ust coming downstairs, stifling a big yawn.  e
smiled knowingly when he saw etherwick.

"atherfield gone, sir" he inquired.  "I heard the door close."

"es gone," assented etherwick.  "he person he wanted appeared
suddenly, and hes gone in pursuit."

he man, a smugfaced, easygoing sort of person, smiled again.

"um doings these police have" he remarked.  "ueer ob, watching all
night through a window.  I was ust coming down to make you a cup of
coffee," he continued.  "Ill get you one in a few minutes, if you
like.  Or tea now  erhaps youd prefer tea"

"Its very good of you," said etherwick.  "But to tell you the truth
Id rather get home and to bed.  any thanks, all the same."

hen, out of sheer good nature, he slipped a treasury note into the
mans hand, and, bidding him good morning, went away.  e, too, walked
down the street in the direction taken by ady iversreade and her
pursuer.  But when he came to the bottom and emerged into arrow oad
he saw nothing of them, either to left or right.  he road, however,
was not deserted there were already workmen going to early morning
tasks, and close by the corner of the own all a roadman was busy with
his broom.  etherwick went up to him.

"id you see a lady, and then a gentleman, come down here, from t.
arys errace, ust now" he asked.  "all people, both of them."

he man rested on his broom, half turned, and pointed towards
addington Bridge.

"I see em, guvnor," he answered.  "all lady, carrying a little
portmantle.  one along over the bridge yonder.  addington station
way.  And, after her, atherfield."

"Oh, you know him, do you" exclaimed etherwick, in surprise.

he man erked a thumb in the direction of the adacent police station.

"sed to be a sergeant here, did atherfield," he replied.  "I knows
him, right enough  Once run me inme an a mate o minefor bein a
bit festive like.  ive bob and costs that was.  But I dont bear him
no grudge, not me  hank ee, guvnor."

etherwick left another tip behind him and walked slowly off towards
dgware oad.  he ube trains were ust beginning to run, and he
caught a southbound one and went down to haring ross and thence to
the emple.  And at six oclock he tumbled into bed, and slept soundly
until, four hours later, he heard apperley moving about in the
adoining room.

apperley, whose ob at etherwicks was a good deal of a sinecure, was
leisurely reading the news when his master entered.  e laid the paper
aside, and gave etherwick a knowing glance.

"ot some more information last night," he said.  "About that chap I
tracked the other day."

"ow did you get it" asked etherwick.

"ut in a bit of time at ivians," answered apperley.  "heres a
fellow there that I know.  lerk to the secretary chap, named lowers.
hat man Baseverie has a share in the placesort of director, I think."

"What time were you at ivians" inquired etherwick.  "ate or early"

"arlyfor them," answered apperley.

"id you see the man there"

"I did.  e was there all the time I was.  In and about all the time.
But at first he was in what seemed to be serious conversation with a
tall, handsome woman.  hey sat talking in an alcove in the lounge
there some time.  hen she went offalone."

"Oh, you saw that, did you" said etherwick.  "Well, I may as well
tell you, since you know what you do, that the woman was ady
iversreade"

"Oh, I guessed that" remarked apperley.  "I figured in that at once.
But that wasnt all.  I found out more.  hat dead man, annafordfrom
what I heard from lowersIve no doubt whatever that annaford was at
ivians once, if not twice, during the two or three nights before his
death.  Anyway, lowers recognised my description of himwhich Id
got, of course, from you and the papers."

"annaford.  here, eh" exclaimed etherwick.  "Alone"

"ocame in with this Baseverie.  hey dont know him as r. Baseverie
there, though.  lain ister.  Im quite sure it was annaford who was
with him."

"id you get the exact datesand times" asked etherwick.

"I didnt.  lowers couldnt say that.  But he remembered such a man."

"Well, thats something," said etherwick.  e turned into another room
and sat down to his breakfast, thinking.  "apperley, come here" he
called presently.  "ook here," he went on as the clerk came in.
"ince you know this ivian place, go there again tonight, and try to
find out if that friend of yours knows anything of a tall man who
corresponds to the description of the man whom annaford was seen to
meet at ictoria.  ou read edbitters account of that, given at the
inquest"

"es," replied apperley.  "But of what value is it  onefor
practical purposes  e couldnt even tell the shape of the mans nose,
nor the colour of his eyes  All he could tell was that he saw a man
muffled in such a fashion that he saw next to nothing of his face, and
that he was tall and smartly dressed.  here are a few tens of
thousandsscores, perhapsof tall, smartlydressed men in ondon"

"ever mindinquire," said etherwick, "and particularly if such a man
has ever been seen in Baseveries company there."

e finished his breakfast, and then, instead of going down to the
entral riminal ourt, after his usual habit, he hung about in his
chambers, expecting atherfield.  But atherfield did not come, and at
noon etherwick, impelled by a new idea, left a message for him in case
he called, and went out.  In pursuance of the idea, he ourneyed once
more to the regions of addington and knocked at the door of the house
wherein he and atherfield had kept watch on the flats opposite.

he lodginghouse keeper opened the door himself and grinned on seeing
etherwick.  etherwick stepped inside and nodded at the door of the
room which he had left only a few hours before.

"I want a word or two with you," he said.  "In private."

"obody in here, sir," replied the man.  "ome in."

e closed the door on himself and his visitor, and offered etherwick a
chair.

"I expected youd be back during the day," he said, with a sly smile.
"ither you or atherfield, or both"

"ou havent seen him again" asked etherwick.

"o hes not been here," replied the man.

"Well, I wanted to ask you a question," continued etherwick.  "erhaps
two or three.  o begin with, have you lived here long"

"Been here since before these flats were builtand thats a good many
years ago I cant say exactly how many," said the other, glancing at
the big block opposite his window.  "wentytwo or three, anyway."

"hen I dare say you know most of the people hereabouts" suggested
etherwick.  "By sight, at any rate."

he lodginghouse keeper smiled and shook his head.

"hat would be a tall order, mister" he answered.  "heres a few
thousand of people packed into this bit of ondon.  Of course, I do
know a good many, close at hand.  But if youre a ondoner youll know
that ondoners keep themselves to themselves.  ay seem queer, but its
a fact that I dont know the names of my nextdoor neighbours on either
sidethough to be sure theyve only been here a few years in either
case."

"What I was suggesting," said etherwick, "was that you probably knew
by sight many of the people who live in the flats opposite your house."

"Oh, I know some of em by sight," assented the man.  "heyre a mixed
lot over in those flats  A few old gentlemenretiredtwo or three
old ladiesand a fair lot of actressesvery popular with the stage is
those flats.  But, of course, it is only by sightI dont know any of
em by name.  ust see them going in and coming out, you know."

"o you happen to know by sight a tall, handsome woman who has a flat
there" asked etherwick.  "A woman whos likely to be very well
dressed"

he lodginghouse keeper, who was without his coat and had the sleeves
of his shirt rolled up, scratched his elbows and looked thoughtful.

"I think I do know the lady you mean," he said at last.  "oes out with
one o those pesky little pomsa black unon a lead  hat her"

"I dont know anything about a dog," replied etherwick.  "he woman I
mean is, as I said, tall, handsome, distinguishedlooking, fair hair
and a fresh complexion, and about forty or so."

"I dare say thats the one Im thinking of," said the man.  "I have
seen such a lady now and thennot of late, though."  hen he gave
etherwick a shrewd, inquiring glance.  "ou and atherfield after
her" he asked.

"ot exactly that," answered etherwick.  "What I want to find
outnowis her name.  he name shes known by here, anyway."

"I can soon settle that for you," said the lodginghouse keeper with
alacrity.  "I know the caretaker of those flats well enoughoften have
a talk with him.  ell tell me anythingbetween ourselves.  ow then,
lets get it righta tall, handsome lady, about forty, fair hair,
fresh complexion, well dressed.  hat it, mister"

"ouve got it," said etherwick.

"hen you wait here a bit, and Ill slip across," said the man.  "All
on the strict between ourselves, you know.  As I said, the caretaker
and mes pals."

e left the room, and a moment later etherwick saw him cross the road
and descend into the basement of the flats.  Within a quarter of an
hour he was back, and evidently primed with news.

"oon settled that for you, mister" he announced triumphantly.  "e
knew who you meant  he ladys name is adame istorelle.  ere, I got
him to write it down on a bit o paper, not being used to foreign
names.  e thinks shes something to do with the stage.  hes the
tenant of flat twentysix.  But he says that of late shes seldom
therecomes for a night or two, then away, maybe for months at a time.
e saw her here yesterday, though she hadnt been there, he says, for
a good bit.  But there, it dont signify to him whether shes there or
awayalways punctual with her money, and thats the main thing, aint
it"

etherwick added to his largess of the early morning, and went away.
e was now convinced that ady iversreade, for some purpose of her
own, kept up a flat in addington, visited it occasionally, and was
known there as adame istorelle.  ow much was there in that, and what
bearing had it on the problem he was endeavouring to solve




A III

WO WA 

ate that night, when etherwick was thinking things over, a pounding
on his stairs and a knock on his outer door heralded the entrance of
atherfield, who, with an expressive look, flung himself into the
nearest easy chair.

"or heavens sake, r. etherwick, give me a drop of that whisky" he
exclaimed.  "Im dead beatand dead disappointed, too  uch a day as
Ive had after that woman  And what it all means the ord only
knowsI dont"

etherwick helped his evidently farspent visitor to a whisky and soda,
and waited until he had taken a hearty pull at it.  hen he resumed his
own seat and took up his pipe.

"I gather that you havent had a very successful day, atherfield" he
suggested.  "ope it wasnt exactly a wildgoose chase"

"hats ust about what it comes to, then" exclaimed atherfield.
"Anyway, after taking no end of trouble she got clear away, practically
under my very nose  But Ill tell you all about it thats what I
dropped in for.  When I went out of that house in t. arys errace,
she was ust turning the corner to the right, Bishops oad way.  Of
course I followed.  he went over the bridgethe big railway
bridgeand at the end turned down to addington tation.  I concluded
then that she was going up by some early morning train.  he entered
the station by the firstclass booking office I was not so many yards
in her rear then.  But instead of stopping there and taking a ticket
she went right through, crossed the station to the arrival platform and
signalled to a taxicab.  In another minute she was in it, and off.
ery luckily there was another cab close by.  I hailed that and told
the driver to keep the first cab in sight and follow it to wherever it
went.  o off we went again, on another pursuit  And it ended at
another terminusWaterloo"

"oing home, I suppose," remarked etherwick, as atherfield paused to
take up his glass.  "ou can get to orking from Waterloo."

"he wasnt going to any orking" answered atherfield.  "I soon found
that out.  arly as it was, there were a lot of people at Waterloo, and
when she went to the ticket office I contrived to be close behind
herclose enough, at any rate, to overhear anything she said.  he
asked for a first single to outhampton."

"outhampton" exclaimed etherwick.  "m"

"outhampton" repeated atherfield.  "irst single for outhampton.
he took the ticket and walked away, looking neither right nor left
she never glanced at me.  Well, as I said yesterday, I dont believe in
starting out on anything unless I go clean through with it.  o after a
minutes thought I booked for outhamptonthird.  hen I went out and
looked at the notice board.  outhampton, ..  It was then ..  o
I went to the telephone office, rang up our headquarters and told em
I was after something and they neednt expect to see me all day.  hen
I bought a timetable and a newspaper or two at the bookstall, ust
opening, and went to the train.  here were a lot of people travelling
by it.  he train hadnt come up to the platform then when it came
down a minute or two later I watched her get in she was good to spot
because of her tall figure.  I got into a smoker, a bit lower down, and
in due course off we went, me wondering, to tell you the truth,
precisely why I was going  But I was goingwherever she went."

"ven out of the country" asked etherwick, with a smile.

"Aye, I thought of that" assented atherfield.  "he might be slinging
her hook for anything I knew.  hat made me turn to the steamship news
in the paper, and I saw then that the artaric was due to leave
outhampton for ew ork about two oclock that very afternoon.  Well,
there were more improbable things than that she meant to go by it, for
reasons of her own, especially if she really is the rs. Whittingham of
the ellithwaite affair ten years ago.  ou see, I thought it out like
thisgranting shes rs. Whittingham, that was, shell be astute
enough to know that theres no timelimit to a criminal prosecution in
this country, and that shes still liable to arrest, prosecution, and
conviction shed probably know, too, that this annaford affair has
somehow drawn fresh attention to her little matter, and that shes in
danger.  Again, Id been working out an idea about her and this man
Baseverie.  ow do we know that Baseverie wasnt an accomplice of hers
in that ellithwaite fraud  In most cases of that sort the woman has
an accomplice somewhere in the backgroundBaseverie may have been
mixed with her then.  And now he may have information that has led him
to warn her to make herself scarce, eh"

"heres something in that, atherfield," admitted etherwick.
"esdecidedly something."

"here may be a good deal," affirmed atherfield.  "ou see, weve let
those newspaper chaps have a lot of information.  Im a believer in
making use of the ress its a valuable aid sometimes, perhaps
generally, but there are other times when you can do too much of it
its a sort of giving valuable aid to the enemy.  I dont know whether
we havent let those reporters know too much in this case.  Weve let
em know, for instance, about the portrait found in annafords
pocketbook, and about the sealed packet in which, we believe, was the
secret of his patent all thats been in the papers, though, to be
sure, they didnt make much copy out of it.  till, there was enough
for anybody who followed the case closely.  ow, supposing that
Baseverie was rs. Whittinghams accomplice ten years ago, and that
hed read all this and seen the reproduction of the portrait, wouldnt
he see that she was in some danger and warn her  I think it likely,
and I wish we hadnt been quite so free with our news for those paper
chaps.  Im glad, anyhow, that theres one thing I havent told em
ofthat medicine bottle found at ranetts  heres nobody but me,
you, and the medical men know of that, so far."

"ou think this womanady iversreade as she is, rs. Whittingham as
she used to bewas making off to outhampton, and possibly farther, on
a hint from Baseverie" said etherwick ruminatively.

"ut it this way," replied atherfield.  "Of course, youve got to
assume a lot, but we cant do without assuming things in this business.
ady iversreade was formerly rs. Whittingham.  rs. Whittingham did a
clever bit of fraud at ellithwaite, and got away with the swag.
Baseverie was her accomplice.  ow then, ten years later rs.
Whittingham has become my ady iversreade, a very wealthy woman.
hes suddenly visited by Baseverie at iversreade ourt, and is
obviously upset by his first visit.  e comes again.  hree nights
later shes seen to come out of a club which he frequents.  he spends
most of the night in a flat in a quiet part of ondon, and next morning
slopes off as early as five oclock to a portouthampton.  What
inference is to be drawn  hat her visit to outhampton has certainly
something to do with Baseveries visits to her and her visit to
ivians"

"I think theres something in that, too," said etherwick, "Butwere
on the way to outhampton.  o on"

"ery good train, that," continued atherfield.  "We got to outhampton
ust before eighta minute or two late.  I was wanting something to
eat and drink by that time, and I was glad to see my lady turn into the
refreshmentroom as soon as she left her carriage.  o did I.  I knew
shed never suspect a quiet, ordinary man like me if she deigned to
give me a glanceshes a very haughtylooking woman, I observedshed
only take me for a commercial traveller.  And we were not so far off
each other in that room she sat at a little table, having some tea and
so on I was at the counter.  Of course, I never showed that I was
taking any notice of herbut I got in two or three good, comprehensive
inspections.  ery goodlooking, no doubt of it, r. etherwicka
woman thats worn well  But of course youve seen that for yourself."

"ou must remember that Ive only seen her twice," remarked etherwick,
with a laugh.  "Once at ictoria, when iss annaford pointed her out
once night before last, when it was by a poorish gaslight.  But Ill
take your word, atherfield.  Well, and what happened next"

"Oh, she took her time over her tea and toast," continued atherfield.
"ery leisured in all her movements, I assure you.  At last she moved
offof course I followed, casually and carelessly.  ow, as you may be
aware, outhampton West, where the train set us down, is a bit out of
the town, and I expected her to take a cab.  But she didnt she walked
away from the station.  o did Itwenty or thirty yards in the rear.
he took her time it seemed to me she was purposely loitering.  It
struck me at last whyshe was waiting until the business offices were
open.  I was right in that as soon as the town clocks struck nine she
quickened her pace and made a beeline for her obective.  And what do
you think that was"

"o idea," said etherwick.

"White tar offices" answered atherfield.  "Went straight there, and
walked straight in  Of course, I waited outside, where she wouldnt
see me when she came out again.  he was in there about twenty minutes.
When she came out she turned to another part of the town.  And near
that old gateway, or bar, or whatever it is that stands across the
street, I lost heraltogether"

"ome exceptional reason, I should think, atherfield," remarked
etherwick.  "ow was it"

"y own stupid fault" growled atherfield.  "ook my eye off her in a
particularly crowded partthe town was beginning to get very busy.  I
ust happened to let my attention be divertedand she was gone  At
first I made certain shed gone into some shop.  I looked into
severalrisky as that wasbut I couldnt find her.  I hung about no
good.  hen I came to the conclusion that shed turned down one of the
side streets or alleys or passagesthere were several about thereand
got clean away.  And after hanging around a bit, and going up one
street and down anothera poor ob in our business at the best of
times and all dependent on mere luckI decided to make a bold stroke
and be sure of at any rate something."

"What  ow" asked etherwick.

"I thought Id find out what shed gone to the White tar offices for,"
replied atherfield.  "Of course, I didnt want to raise any suspicion
against her under the circumstances.  But I flatter myself Im a bit of
a diplomatist, and I laid my plans.  I went in there, got hold of a
clerk who was a likely looking chap for secret keeping, told him who I
was and showed my credentials, and asked him for the information I
wanted.  I got it.  As luck would have it, my man had attended to her
himself and remembered her quite well.  Of course, little more than an
hour and a half had passed since shed been in there."

"Andwhat had she been in for" asked etherwick.  "What did you hear"

atherfield nodded significantly.

"ust what I expected to hear," he answered.  "hed booked a
secondclass passage for ew ork in the artaric, sailing that
afternoon, in the name of . unningham.  As soon as I found that out,
I knew I should come across her againthered be no need to go raking
the town for her.  I ascertained that passengers would be allowed to go
aboard from two oclock the boat would sail between five and six.  o,
having once more admonished the clerk to secrecy and given him
plausible excuses for my inquisitiveness, I went off to relax a bit,
and in due time sat down to an early and comfortable luncha man must
take his ease now and then, you know, r. etherwick."

"xactly, atherfieldI quite agree," said etherwick.  "But I dare
say your brain was at work, all the same, while you ate and drank"

"It was, sir," assented atherfield.  "esI made my plans.  I wasnt
going to ew ork, of course that was out of the question.  But I was
going to have speech with her.  I decided that Id watch for her coming
aboard the artaricbeing alone, shed probably come early.  I
proposed to get her aside, accosting her, of course, as ady
iversreade, tell her who I was and show my papers, and ask her if she
would give me any information about a certain r. yprian Baseverie.  I
thought Id see how she took that before asking anything further if I
saw that she was taken aback, confused, and especially if she gave me
any prevaricating or elusive answer, Id ask her straight out if before
her marriage to the late ir ohn iversreade she was the rs.
Whittingham who, some ten years ago, stayed for a time at the White
art otel at ellithwaite.  And I practically made up my mind, too,
that if she admitted that and I saw good cause for it, Id detain her."

"ou meant to go as far as that" exclaimed etherwick.

"I did  I should have been ustified," replied atherfield.  "owever,
thats neither here nor there, for I never saw her  I was down at the
point of departure well before two, and I assured myself that nobody
had gone aboard the artaric up to that time.  I kept as sharp a look
out as any man with only one pair of eyes could, right away from ten
minutes to two until fiveandtwenty past five, when the boat sailed,
but she never turned up.  Of course youll say that she must have
slipped on unobserved by me, but Im positive she didnt.  o, sir
Its my opinion that she thought better of it and didnt goforfeiting
her passage money, or a part of it, would be nothing to a woman of her
meansor that she was frightened at the last minute of showing herself
on that stage"

"rightened  Why" asked etherwick.

atherfield laughed significantly.

"here were two or three of our men from cotland ard about," he
answered.  "Im not aware of what they were after I didnt ask em.
But I did ask them to give me a hand in looking out for a lady whom I
fully describedwhich is why Im dead certain she never went aboard.
ow, it may have been that she came down there, knewyou never
knowsome of those chaps andmade herself scarce  AnywayI never
set eyes on her.  ever, in fact, saw her again after I lost her in the
morning.  othats where I am"

"ou came backdefeated" remarked etherwick.

"Well, if you like to call it so," admitted atherfield.  "es, I came
back by the seven thirtyeight.  og tired  But Im not through with
this yet, r. etherwick, and I want you to do something for me.  his
iss annaford, now, is down at iversreade ourt.  heyll be on the
telephone there, of course.  I want you to ring her up early tomorrow
morning, and ask her if she can meet you on important private business
in orking town at noon.  Where shall we say"

"White orse would do," suggested etherwick.

"ery wellWhite orse otel, at noon," agreed atherfield.  "Well go
downfor Ill go with youby the . from ictoria.  ow please be
very careful about this, r. etherwick, when you telephone.  ont say
anything of any reason for going down to orking.  ont on any account
mention ady iversreade, in any way.  erely tell iss annaford that
you have urgent reasons for seeing her.  Andfix it up"

"Oh, I can fix it up all right," answered etherwick.  "iss annaford
can easily drive down from iversreade ourt.  But I dont know what
you want her for."

"Wait till morning," replied atherfield, with a knowing look.  "oull
see.  Ill meet you at ictoria at ten oclock, sharp."




A I

I I BAAI

etherwick was still in ignorance of the reason of atherfields desire
to see hona when, ust before noon next day, atherfield and he walked
up from orking tation into the igh treet, and made for the "White
orse."  atherfield halted a few yards away from its door.

"ets wait outside for her," he said.  "ill Ive asked her a question
or two.  I dont want to even run the risk of being overheard."

hona came along in a car a few minutes later, and seeing the two men
advanced to meet them.  atherfield lost no time in getting to business.

"iss annaford," he said, with a cautious look round, and in a low
voice, "ust tell meis ady iversreade up there at the ourt  he
is" he continued, as hona nodded.  "When did she come back, then"

"ery early yesterday morning," answered hona promptly.  "By the .
from ictoria.  he was up at the ourt by .."

atherfield turned an utterly perplexed face on etherwick.  hen he
stared at hona.

"p at iversreade ourt at . yesterdayuesdaymorning" he
exclaimed.  "Impossible  I saw her at outhampton at . yesterday
morning with my own eyes."

"Im quite sure you didnt" replied hona, with a satirical laugh.
"oure under some queer mistaken impression, r. atherfield.  ady
iversreade was in her own house, here, with me at . yesterday
morning.  hats a fact that I can vouch for"

he two men looked at each other.  ach seemed to be asking the other a
silent question.  But atherfield suddenly voiced his, in tones full of
wonder and of chagrin.

"hen who on earth is that woman that I followed to outhampton"

atherfields question went without answer.  hona, who had no idea of
what he was talking about, turned a surprised and inquiring look on
etherwick.  And etherwick saw that the time had come for a lot of
explanation.

"ook here" he said.  "Weve got to do some talking, and we cant keep
iss annaford standing in the street.  ome into the hotelwell get
a private room for lunch, and then we can discuss matters all to
ourselves.  oure a bit puzzled by all this," he continued a few
minutes later, turning to hona when all three were safely closeted
together, and lunch had been ordered.  "And no wonder  But Id better
tell you what atherfield and I were after on onday night, and what
atherfield was doing all yesterday.  ou see," he concluded, after
giving hona an epitomised account of the recent proceedings, "I was
absolutely certain that the woman whom we saw coming out of ivians on
onday night was the woman you pointed out to me on unday morning at
ictoria as ady iversreadeshe was dressed in ust the same things,
Im positivein short Im convinced it was ady iversreade.  hen,
atherfield and I are both equally sure that that was the same woman we
saw coming out of t. arys ansions shortly before five oclock
yesterday morning, and whom atherfield followed to outhampton, p to
now, weve never had a doubt that it was ady iversreadenot a doubt"

"Well," said hona, with an incredulous laugh, "I cant say, of course,
that you didnt see ady iversreade come out of ivians on onday
night.  ady iversreade was certainly in town from unday noon to
yesterday morning, and she may have gone to ivians on onday night
for purposes of her own.  I know nothing about that.  But I do know
that she was not in outhampton yesterday, for, as I told you, she was
back home at iversreade ourt, about halfpast nine in the morning,
and shes never left the house since.  hats plain fact"

"Its beyond me, then" exclaimed atherfield.  "And I say again, if
that wasnt ady iversreade that I tracked to outhampton, who was it
Ill say moreif that really was ady iversreade that we saw coming
out of ivians, and followed to addington, and if she wasnt the
woman who came out of those flats yesterday morning, and that I went
after, well, then, ady iversreade has a doublewho lives in t.
arys ansions  hats about it"

"As regards that," remarked etherwick.  "I didnt tell you last night,
atherfield, that I went back yesterday to that house from which we
watched, and made some cautious inquiries about the tall, handsome
woman who has a flat opposite.  I got some information.  he woman whom
we followed there, and whom you were running after yesterday is known
there as a adame istorelle.  hes very little at her flat, though
punctual with its rent.  hes sometimes away altogether for long
periodsin fact, shes rarely seen there.  And shes believed to be
connected with the stage.  he caretaker who supplied this information
saw her at the flat on onday."

atherfield smacked one hand on the open palm of the other.

"Its an alias" he exclaimed.  "Bet your stars shes ady iversreade
Away from her flat for long periods  Of coursebecause shes down
here, at her big house.  eeps that flat up for some purpose of her
own, and calls herselfwhat is itsounds rench."

"But supposing thats so," remarked etherwick, with a sly glance at
hona.  "Its utterly impossible that ady iversreade could be at
iversreade ourt yesterday, and in outhampton at the same time
ome, now"

"Well, I tell you it beats me" muttered atherfield.  "I know what I
saw  If theres anything gone wrong, its your fault, r. etherwick
I dont know this ady iversreade  All I know is that you said the
woman we saw coming out of that club was ady iversreade.  hat, sir,
is the woman I followed"

"he woman I saw coming out of ivians was the woman pointed out to me
by iss annaford as ady iversreade," affirmed etherwick quietly.
"hats certain  But"

e was interrupted at this stage by the arrival of lunch.  othing more
was said until all three were seated, and the waiter had been sent
away.  hen hona looked at her companions and smiled.

"ou both seem to have arrived at a very promising stage" she said.
"At first I thought it a regular impasse, but"

"Isnt it" asked etherwick.  "At present I dont see any way through
or over it."

"Oh, I think youre getting towards something" she retorted.  "All
these things, puzzling as they are, are better than nothing.  Ive got
some news, tooif youre sure there are no eavesdroppers about."

"Oh, were all right" said etherwick.  "ood stout old doors,
theseclosefitting.  What next"

hona leaned across the table a little, and lowered her voice.

"here was a sort of row at the ourt at least, at the ome,
yesterday," she said.  "With that man Baseverie"

"Ah" exclaimed etherwick.  "hats interesting  ell about it."

"Well, I told you that ady iversreade arrived from ondon yesterday
morning about ninethirty," continued hona.  "aor enteney arrived
with her."

"Whos aor enteney" demanded atherfield.

"es a retired Army man whos greatly interested in ady iversreades
ome, and looks after its affairs in ondon," replied etherwick.  "And
iss annaford thinks hes in love with the foundress.  Ive seen
himsaw him with ady iversreade on unday.  es," he added, turning
to hona, "aor enteney came back with her  o on."

"As soon as they arrivedI saw them come, from my office windowthey
came across to the ome," continued hona.  "It struck me that they
both looked unusually grave and serious.  hey talked to me for a few
minutes on business matters then they went into ady iversreades
private office.  hey were there for some little time then ady
iversreade came out and went away I saw her cross to the ourt.
resently aor enteney came to me, and told me that he wanted to have
a little private talk with me.  e saidas near as I can
rememberiss eatherstone"

atherfield looked up quickly from his plate.

"h" he said.  "isseatherstone"

"hats the name iss annafords known bythere," said etherwick.
"er mothers name.  I told you before, you know."

"rue, true" assented atherfield, with a groan.  "ou didI remember
now.  Im muddledwith yesterdays affair."

"iss eatherstone, hona went onI believe youre aware that ady
iversreade has lately been visitedtwiceby a man who called himself
r. yprian Baseverie

"es, I answered, I am, aor enteney.  I saw r. Baseverie on both
occasions.  Well, he saidI dont suppose you were at all
impressed by him ot at all impressed, aor enteney, I replied,
except very unfavourably.  idnt like his looks, eh, he asked with
a smile.  o you I inquired.  Ive never seen the fellow, he
answered.  But I expect tothis very morning.  hats what I want to
talk to you about.  I believe hell turn up about noonas, I
understand, he did before, wanting, of course, to see ady iversreade.
I want you to tell the doorkeeper, itchell, to bring him straight in
when he comes, and itchell is not to say that ady iversreade is not
inshe wont be inhes to admit him immediately and you, if you
please, are to show him straight into the private office.  Instead of
finding ady iversreade there, hell findme.  Is that clear
erfectly clear, aor enteney, I replied.  Ill see to it.
Well, theres something else, he said.  After I have had a little
plainspoken talk with this fellow, I shall ring the bell.  I want you
to come in, and to bring itchell with you.  Andthats all, at
present.  ou understand  I understand, aor enteney, I answered.
Ill see to it.  But as youve never seen this man theres one thing
Id like to say to youhes the sort of man who looks as if he might
be dangerous.  e smiled at that.  hank you, he said.  Im
prepared for that, iss eatherstone.  ou show him right in."

hona paused for a moment, to attend to the contents of her plate.  But
etherwicks knife and fork had become idle so had atherfields each
man, it was plain, was becoming absorbed.  And atherfield suddenly
brightened, and gave etherwick an unmistakable wink.

"oodgoodgood" he muttered, with something like a chuckle.  "Im
beginning to see a bit of daylight  xcellentwhen youre ready,
iss eatherstone"

"Well," continued hona, after a few minutes pause, "about noon, r.
yprian Baseverie drove up.  I had already given itchell his
instructions, and he brought Baseverie straight into my office.
Baseverie was evidently in the very best of spiritshe bowed and
grimaced at sight of me as if he expected to find me dying to see him.
I made no answer to his flowery greetings I ust got up, ushered him
to the door of the private room, and closed it after him as he stepped
across the threshold.  hen I laughedhe wouldnt see who was awaiting
him until he got right into the room, and Id already gathered from
aor enteney that his reception couldnt be exactly pleasant or
agreeable."

atherfield rubbed his hands together.

"oodgood" he chuckled.  "Wish Id been in that room"

"It wasnt long before I was there, r. atherfield," said hona.  "I
was, of course, tremendously curious to know what was going on there,
but the door fits closely, and I heard nothingno angry voices or
anything.  owever, in less than ten minutes the bell rang sharply.  I
called itchellhes a big, strapping, very determinedlooking
exuardsmanand in we went.  I took everything in at a glance, aor
enteney sat at ady iversreades desk.  On the blottingpad, his
right hand close to it, lay a revolver"

"ah" exclaimed atherfield.  "o be sure  ust so  ine"

"Opposite the desk stood Baseverie, staring first at aor enteney,
then at us.  Its difficult for me to describe how he looked.  I think
the principal expression on his face was one of intense surprise."

"urprise" eaculated etherwick.

"urprise  Astonishment  e looked like a man who had ust heard
something that he has believed it impossible to hear.  But there was
also such a look of anger and ragewell, if aor enteney hadnt had
that revolver close to his fingerends, and if itchell hadnt been
there, I should have screamed and run.  owever, it was not I who was
to do the running.  As soon as itchell and I entered, aor enteney
spokevery quietly.  e nodded at Baseverie.  iss eatherstone and
you, itchellyou see this man  If ever he comes here again, you,
itchell, will deny him entrance, and you, iss eatherstone, on
hearing from itchell that hes here, will telephone for the police
and, if he hangs about, will give him in charge.  hen he turned to
Baseverie.  ow, my man he continued, pointing to the door.  ou
get outquick  o  Of course, I looked at Baseverie.  e stood
staring almost incredulously at aor enteney.  It seemed to me that
he could scarcely believe his earshe gave me the impression of being
unable to credit that he could be so treated.  But he was also livid
with anger.  is fingers worked his eyes blazed it was dreadful to
see his lips.  e got out some words at last"

"ive me the exact ones, if you can," interrupted atherfield.

"I canIm not likely to forget them," said hona.  "e
saidWhatyou defy me, knowing what I knowknowing what I know"

"nowing what I know" muttered atherfield.  "nowing what he knew
mand then"

"hen aor enteney ust pointed to the door.  et out, I tell you
he said.  And look in the papers tonight.  Be off"

"ook in the papers tonight, eh" said atherfield.  "mum  And
then, I suppose, he went"

"e went without another word then," assented hona.  "itchell
escorted him out and saw him off.  aor enteney looked at me when
hed gone.  here, iss eatherstone, he said, youve seen one of
the biggest scoundrels in ondonor in urope.  ets hope youll
never see him again, that thats the end of him here.  I think hes had
his lesson  I made no answer, but I was olly glad to see Baseveries
car scooting away down the drive"

atherfield picked up the tankard of ale at his side and took a hearty
pull at its contents.  e set the tankard down again with an emphatic
bang.

"I know what this ob is" he exclaimed triumphantly.  "Blackmail"

"ust so" agreed etherwick.  "Ive been thinking that for the last
ten minutes.  Baseverie has been endeavouring to blackmail ady
iversreade.  But thats not our affair, you know.  What were after is
the solving of the mystery surrounding annafords death.  Anddoes
this look likely to fit in anywhere"

"I should say it decidedly does look likely" answered atherfield.
"In my opinion its all of a piece at least, its a piece out of a
piece, one of many pieces, like a puzzle.  he thing is to put these
pieces together.  And there are two things we can try to do at once.
irst, find out more about this man Baseverie the other, get hold of
more information about the lady in t. arys ansions."

"What about approaching ady iversreade for informationor aor
enteney" suggested etherwick.

"eswhy dont you" said hona, almost eagerly.  "o  Im a bit
tired of being there as iss eatherstone.  I want to tell ady
iversreade the truth, and all the whys and wherefores of it."

But atherfield shook his head.  he time for that was not yet, he
declared let them wait awhile.  And after more conversation he and
etherwick returned to ondon.




A 

AIO

he late afternoon edition of the evening papers were ust out when
etherwick and atherfield reached ictoria.  atherfield snatched one
up a moment later he thrust it before etherwick, pointing to some big
black capitals.

"ood od" he exclaimed.  "ook at that"

etherwick looked, and gasped his astonishment at what he read.

   O OB AAO.
  I OA O WA.


etherwick turned on his companion with a look that was both
questioning and surprised.

"his is probablyno, certainlywhat enteney referred to when he
told Baseverie to look in the newspapers" he said.  "hat was
yesterday it must have been in last nights papers, and this
mornings.  I saw neither."

"Wait" said atherfield.  e hurried back to the bookstall and
returned with an armful of papers, turning the topmost over as he came.
"Its hereand here" he continued.  "ets get a quiet corner
somewhere and look this thing carefully over"

"ome into a waitingroom, then," said etherwick.  "Odd" he muttered,
as they turned away.  "Who should offer a rewardlike that, toowho
isnt concerned in the case"

"ow do we know who isnt concerned in the case" exclaimed
atherfield.  "omebody evidently issomebody who can not only afford
to offer five thousand pounds, but isnt afraid to spend no end in
advertising.  ook at thatand thatand that," he went on, turning
over his purchases rapidly.  "Its in every paper in ondon"

"ets read it carefully," said etherwick.  e spread out one of the
newspapers on the waitingroom table and muttered the wording of the
advertisement while atherfield looked over his shoulder.  "ysterious,
very" he concluded.  "Whats it mean"

But atherfield was rereading the advertisement.


Whereas obert annaford, formerly uperintendent of olice at
ellithwaite, orkshire, died suddenly in an nderground ailway train,
near haring ross (mbankment) tation about . a.m. on arch th
last, and expert medical investigation has proved that he was poisoned,
and there is evidence to warrant the belief that the poison was
administered by some person or persons with intent to cause his death,
this is to give notice that the abovementioned sum of ive housand
ounds will be paid to anyone first giving information which will lead
to the arrest and conviction of the person or persons concerned in
administering the said poison and that such information should be given
to the undersigned, who will pay the said reward in accordance with the
abovestated conditions.

, BIO  ,
  olicitors.

April nd, .
  , incolns Inn ields,
    ondon, W..


atherfield pointed to the names of the signatories.

"enteney," he remarked.  "hats the name of the man iss annaford
mentioned as having given Baseverie his dismissal."

"Of courseaor enteney," said etherwick.  "robably a unior
partner in the firm.  I know their names, but not much about them."

"I thought he was a soldier," said atherfield.  "aor, she called
him."

"ery likely a erritorial officer," replied etherwick.  "Anyway, its
very plain what this is, atherfield, considering all we know.  his
advertisement has been issued on behalf of ady iversreade.  enteney,
Blenkinsop  enteney are no doubt her solicitors.  Butwhy"

"Aye, why" exclaimed atherfield.  "hats ust what beats me  What
interest has she in annafords murder  Why should she want to bring
his murderer to ustice  If his granddaughter had offered, say, a
hundred pounds for information, I could understand itshes his flesh
and blood.  But ady iversreade  Why, if shes really the woman who
was once rs. Whittingham, youd have thought shed have been rather
glad that annaford was out of the way  And, after all, this maynt
come from her."

"Im absolutely certain it does," asserted etherwick.  "utting
everything together, what other conclusion can we come to  It comes
from ady iversreadeand her adviseraor enteney, and its
something to do with that man Baseverie.  Butwhat"

"It ought to be looked into," muttered atherfield.  "heyve never
approached us on the matter.  Its a purely voluntary offer on their
part.  heyve left the police clean out."

"Well, I make a suggestion," said etherwick.  "I think you and I had
better call at enteneys tomorrow morning.  We can tell them
somethingperhaps theyll tell us something.  Anyway, its a foolish
thing to divide forces wed far better unite in a common effort."

"m" replied atherfield doubtfully.  "But these lawyer chapstheyve
generally got something up their sleevessome card that they want to
play at their own moment.  owever, we can try em."

"eet me at the southeast corner of incolns Inn ields at halfpast
ten tomorrow morning," said etherwick.  "enteneys offices are close
by.  Well go togetherand ask them straight out what this
advertisement means."

"All rightbut if they wont tell" suggested atherfield.

"hen, in that case, well introduce ady iversreades name, and ask
them if ady iversreade of iversreade ourt and rs. Whittingham,
formerly of ellithwaite, are one and the same person," replied
etherwick.  "ome  I think we can show them that we already know a
good deal."

"We have certainly a card or two to play," admitted atherfield.  "All
right, r. etherwick  omorrow morning, then, as you suggest."

e was waiting at the appointed place when etherwick hurried up next
morning.  etherwick immediately turned him down the lower side of the
ields.

"Ive found out something about these people were going to see," he
said.  "y clerk, apperley, told me a bit hes a sort of walking
encyclopdia.  Old, highly respectable firm this.  enteney, senior, is
retired the firm is now really Blenkinsop  enteney, unior.  And
enteney, unior, is the aor enteney who takes such an interest in
ady iversreades omeand in ady iversreade.  As I suggested last
night, he was a erritorial officerso now hes back at his own ob.
ow then, atherfield, lets arrange our plan of campaign.  ou, of
course, have your official credentialsIm a deeply interested person,
the man who chanced to witness annafords death.  I think youd better
be spokesman."

"Well, youll come in when wanted" suggested atherfield.  "oure
better used to lawyers than I am, being one yourself."

"I fear my acquaintance with solicitors is, so far, extremely limited,
atherfield," replied etherwick with a laugh.  "I have seen a
briefbut only occasionally.  owever, here we are at , and a
solid and sombre old house it is."

he two callers had to wait for some time before any apparent notice
was taken of their cards by the persons to whom they had been sent in.
atherfield was beginning to chafe when, at last, an elderly clerk
conducted them up to an inner room wherein one coldeyed,
immobilefaced man sat at a desk, while another,, scarcely less stern
in appearance, in whom etherwick immediately recognised the aor
enteney pointed out by hona, stood, hands in pockets, on the
hearthrug.  ach stared silently at the two callers the man at the
desk pointed to chairs on either side of his fortress.  e looked at
atherfield.

"es" he asked.

"r. Blenkinsop, I presume" began atherfield, with a polite bow to
the desk.  "And r. enteney" with another to the hearthrug.

"ust so," agreed Blenkinsop.  "recisely  es"

"ou have my card, gentlemen, and so you know who I am," continued
atherfield.  "he police"

"A moment," interrupted Blenkinsop.  e picked up etherwicks card and
glanced from it to its presenter.  "r. uy etherwick," he remarked.
"oes r. etherwick also call on behalf of the police  Because," he
added, with a dry smile, "I think Ive seen r. etherwick in wig and
gown."

"I am the man who was present at obert annafords death," said
etherwick.  "If you are conversant with the case"

"uiteevery detail" said Blenkinsop.

"hen you know what I saw, and what evidence I gave at the inquest,"
continued etherwick.  "I have followed up the case ever sinceand
thats why I am here."

"ot as amicus curi, then" remarked Blenkinsop with a still dryer
smile.  "oure not a disinterested adviser.  I see  And r.
atherfieldwhy is he here"

"I was saying, r. Blenkinsop, that the police have seen the
advertisement signed by your firm, offering five thousand pounds
rewardetcetera," answered atherfield.  "ow, I have this annaford
case in hand, and I can assure you Ive done a lot of work at it.  o,
in his way, has r. etherwick.  Were convinced that annaford was
murdered by poison, and that whoever poisoned him also poisoned the man
ranett at the same time.  ow, as either you or some persona client,
I supposebehind you is so much concerned in bringing annafords
murderer to ustice as to offer a big sum for necessary information, we
think you must know a great deal, and I suggest to you, gentlemen, that
you ought to place your knowledge at our disposal.  I hope my
suggestion is welcome, gentlemen."

Blenkinsop drummed the blottingpad before him with the tips of his
fingers, and his face became more inscrutable than ever.  As for
enteney, he maintained the same attitude which he had preserved ever
since the visitors entered the room, lounging against the mantelpiece,
hands in pockets, and his eyes alternately fixed on either etherwick
or atherfield.  here was a brief silence at last Blenkinsop spoke
abruptly.

"I dont think we have anything to say," he said.  "What we have to say
has been said already in the advertisement.  We shall pay the offered
reward to the person who gives satisfactory information.  I dont think
that interferes with the police work."

"hat doesnt help me much, r. Blenkinsop," protested atherfield.
"ou, or your client, must know more than that  here must be good
reasons why your client should offer such a big sum as reward.  I think
we ought to knowmore."

"I am not prepared to tell you more," answered Blenkinsop.  "xcept
that if we get the information which we think we shall get, we shall
not be slow to hand it over to the police authorities."

"hat might be too late," urged atherfield.  "his is an intricate
casethere are a good many wheels within wheels."  hen, interpreting
a glance which he had ust received from etherwick as a signal to go
further, he added "We know what a lot of wheels there areno one
better  or example, gentlemen, there is the curious fashion in which
this affair is mixed up with ady iversreade"

In spite of their evidently habitual practice of selfcontrol, the two
solicitors could not repress signs of astonishment.  Blenkinsops face
fell enteney started out of his lounging attitude and stood upright.
And for the first time he spoke.

"What do you know about ady iversreade" he demanded.

"A good deal, sir, but not so much as I intend to know," answered
atherfield firmly.  "But I do know thisthat annaford, ust previous
to his sudden death, was in possession of a portrait of ady
iversreade, and believed her to be identical with a certain rs.
Whittingham who was through his hands on a charge of fraud, ten years
ago, at ellithwaite, in orkshire.  I, too, believe that this rs.
Whittingham is now ady iversreade, and I may tell you that Im in
full possession of all the facts relating to the ellithwaite
affairan affair of obtaining a diamond necklace, worth about four
thousand pounds, by means of a worthless cheque, and"

Blenkinsop suddenly rose from his chair, holding up a hand.

"A moment, if you please" he said.  "enteney," he continued, turning
to his partner, "a word with you in your room."

atherfield glanced triumphantly after the retreating pair, and laughed
when a door had closed on them.

"hats got em, r. etherwick" he exclaimed.  "hey see that we know
more than they reckoned for.  In some way or other, it strikes me, this
advertisement is a piece of bluff"

"Bluff" said etherwick.  "What do you mean"

"What I say," answered atherfield.  "Bluff  one to prevent somebody
from bringing up that old ellithwaite affair.  ay you a thousand to
one it is.  oull see these two lawyers will be more communicative
when they come back.  ow they shall talkand well listen"

"If you have to do any more talking, atherfield," said etherwick,
"keep iss annafords name out of it.  hes in a rather awkward
position.  he went there, of course, to find out what she could, and
the results been that shes taken a fancy to ady iversreade, got a
genuine interest in the work there, and wants to stop.  Bit of a
bother, all that, and itll need some straightening out.  Anyway, keep
her name out of it here."

"As I say, sir, when these chaps come back to us, theyll do the
talking" answered atherfield, with a chuckle.  "oull see  If you
want to keep iss annafords name out, so do they want to keep ady
iversreades name outI know the signs"

Blenkinsop and enteney suddenly came back and seated themselves,
Blenkinsop at his desk and enteney close by.  And Blenkinsop
immediately turned to his callers.  is manner had changed he looked
now like a man who is anxious to get a settlement of a difficult
question.

"We have decided to talk freely to you," he said at once.  "hat means,
to tell you everything we know about this matter.  ou, r.
atherfield, as representing the police, will, of course, treat our
communication confidentially.  I neednt ask you, r. etherwick, to
regard all thats said here, asyou know  ow, to begin withust
get one fact, an absolutely irrefutable fact, into your minds at once.
ady iversreade is not the woman who was known as rs. Whittingham at
ellithwaite ten years ago, nor did annaford believe that she was
either"

"What" exclaimed atherfield.  "But" he turned to etherwick.
"ou hear that" he went on.  "Why, we know"

"et r. Blenkinsop go on," said etherwick quietly.  "es explaining,
I think."

"ust so," agreed Blenkinsop.  "And Im beginning by endeavouring to
clear away a few mistaken ideas from your minds.  ady iversreade is
not rs. Whittingham.  annaford did not think she was rs.
Whittingham.  It was not ady iversreades portrait that annaford cut
out of the paper."

etherwick could not repress a start at that.

"Whose was it, then" he demanded.  "or I certainly believed it was"

Blenkinsop stooped and drew out a drawer from his desk.  rom a bundle
of documents he produced a newspaper, carefully folded and labelled.
Opening this, he laid it before the two visitors, pointing to a picture
marked with blue pencil.  And etherwick at once saw that here was a
duplicate of the portrait in his own pocketbook.  But there was this
important differencewhile annaford had cut away the lettering under
his picture, it was there in the one which Blenkinsop exhibited.  e
started again as he read itadame Anita istorelle.

"hats the picture which annaford cut out of the paper," said
Blenkinsop.  "It is not that of ady iversreade."

"hen its that of a woman whos her double" exclaimed atherfield.
"Ill lay anything that if you asked a hundred men whove seen ady
iversreade if thats her picture, theyd swear it is"

"I see," said etherwick, disregarding his companions outburst, "that
this purports to be a portrait of a adame istorelle, who is described
in the accompanying letterpress as a famous connoisseur of precious
stones.  ow, in relation to what were discussing, may I ask a plain
question  Who is adame istorelle"

Blenkinsop smiledoracularly.

"adame istorelle," he replied, "is the twin sister of ady
iversreade"




A I

I O

Blenkinsops sudden announcement, not altogether unexpected by
etherwick as a result of the last few minutes proceedings, seemed to
strike atherfield with all the force of a lightninglike illumination.
is mouth opened his eyes widened he turned on etherwick as if,
having been lost for a while in a baffling maze, he had suddenly seen a
way pointed out to him.

"Oh, thats it, is it" he exclaimed.  "A twin sister, eh  henbut
go on, r. Blenkinsop Im beginning to see things."

"he matter is doubtless puzzlingto outsiders," responded Blenkinsop.
"o clear it up, I shall have to go into some family history.  ady
iversreade and adame istorelle are, I repeat, twin sisters.  hey
are the daughters of a man who in his time was captain of various
merchant shipsthe old sailing shipsand who knocked about the world
a good deal.  e married an American woman, and his two daughters were
born in alveston, exas.  hey were educated in Americabut theres
no need to go into the particulars of their early lives"

"heres a certain particular that I should like to have some
information about, if you please," interrupted etherwick.  "he rs.
Whittingham who was at ellithwaite ten years ago had the figure of a
snake tattooed round a wrist, in various colours.  he wore a black
velvet band to cover it.  ow"

Blenkinsop turned to his partner with a smile.

"I thought that would come up," he said.  "Well r. etherwick, if you
want to know about that matter, both sisters are tattooed in the same
fashion.  hat was a bit of work of the old seadog, their fathera
fancy, and a very foolish one, of his.  e had the children tattooed in
that way when they were quite young, much to their disgust when they
grew older.  ach lady wears a covering velvet armletas I know."

"roceed, if you please," said etherwick.  "hats cleared up"

"I gather that youve been making inquiries on your own account,"
observed Blenkinsop.  "Well, since were determined to tell you
everything, well be as good as our word.  o lets come to the
ellithwaite affair.  ouve probably heard only one versionyou may
have got it from annaford you may have got it from old newspapers
you may have got it on the spotits immaterial to us.  But you
havent heard the version of the lady who was then rs. Whittingham.
hat puts a rather different complexion on things.  or reasons of her
own, with which weve nothing to do, rs. Whittinghamher proper and
legal name at that timestayed at ellithwaite for a while.  he had
various transactions with a eweller there eventually she bought from
him a diamond necklace at a pricethree thousand nine hundred pounds.
he gave him a cheque for the amount, fully expecting that by the time
it reached her bankers in anchester certain funds for her credit would
have reached them from America.  here was a hitchthe funds didnt
arrivethe cheque was returned.  he eweller approached the
policeannaford, their superintendent there, got out a warrant and
tracked down rs. Whittingham.  e arrested her, and she got away from
him, left ngland, and returned to America.  or some time she was in
financial straits.  But she did not forget her liabilities, and
eventually she sent the ellithwaite eweller the agreed price of the
diamond necklace, and eight years interest at five per cent. on the
amount.  he holds his formal receipt for the money she sent him.  o
much for that episodewhether annaford ever knew of the payment or
not, I dont know.  We are rather inclined to believe that he didnt.
Butthe necklace was paid for, and paid for handsomely."

"I may as well say that Im aware of that," remarked etherwick.  "I
have been informed of the fact at first hand."

"ery good.  I see you have been at ellithwaite," said Blenkinsop with
another of his shrewd smiles.  "ow then, we come to what is far more
pertinentrecent events.  he situation as regards ady iversreade
and adame istorelle some little time agosay, when annaford came to
townwas this ady iversreade, widow of ir ohn iversreade, had
inherited his considerable fortune, was settled at iversreade ourt in
urrey, and had founded a ome for wounded officers close by, of which
my friend and partner, aor enteney there, is ondon representative.
er sister, adame istorelle, had a flat at addington and another in
ew ork.  he was chiefly in ew ork, but she was sometimes in ondon
and sometimes in aris.  As a matter of fact, adame istorelle is an
expert in precious stones, and a dealer in them.  But she has recently
become engaged to be married to a wellknown peer, an elderly, very
wealthy manwhich possibly has a good deal to do with what I am going
to tell you."

"robably, I think, Blenkinsopnot possibly," suggested enteney.
"robablydecidedly."

"robably, thenprobably" assented Blenkinsop.  e leaned forward
across his desk towards the two listeners.  "ow, gentlemen, your
closest attention, for Im coming to the really important points of
this matterthose that affect the police particularly.  About a
fortnight ago ady iversreade, being in her private office at her
home, close by iversreade ourt, was waited upon by a man who sent in
a card bearing the name of r. yprian Baseverie.  ady iversreade
thought that the presenter of this card was some medical man who wished
to inspect the ome, and he was admitted to see her.  he soon found
out that he had come on no such errand as she had imagined.  e told
her a strange tale.  e let her know, to begin with, that he was fully
conversant with that episode in her sisters life which related to
ellithwaite and the diamond necklace.  ady iversreade, who knew all
about it, felt that the mans information had been gained at first
hand.  e also let her know that adame istorelles whereabouts and
engagement were familiar to him in short, he showed that he was well
up in the present family history, both as regards ady iversreade and
her sister.  hen he let his hand be seen more plainly.  e told ady
iversreade that a certain gang of men in ondon had become acquainted
with the facts of the ellithwaite matter, the warrant, the arrest, the
escape, and that they were also aware of adame istorelles engagement
to ordwe will leave his name out at present, or refer to him as ord
and that they wanted a price for their silence.  In other words,
they were determined on blackmail.  If they were not paid their price,
they were going to ord , with all the facts, to tell him that he was
engaged to a woman who, as they would put it, was still liable by the
law of the land to arrest and prosecution for fraud."

"Isnt she" asked atherfield suddenly.  "o timelimit in these sort
of cases, I think, r. Blenkinsop.  iable ten or twenty or thirty
years afterI think"

"Ive already said that the ellithwaite affair was one of account,"
replied Blenkinsop.  "here was no intent to defraud, and the full
amount and interest on it was duly paid.  But thats not the
pointwere dealing with the presentment of this to ady iversreade
by the man Baseverie.  Of course, ady iversreade didnt know how the
law might be, and she was alarmed on her sisters account.  he asked
Baseverie what he wanted.  e told her plainly then that he could
settle these menif she would find the money.  e had, he said, a
certain hold over them which he could use to advantage.  ady
iversreade wanted to know what that hold was he wouldnt tell her.
he then wanted to know how much the men wanted he wouldnt say.  What
he did say was that if she would be prepared to find the money to
silence them, he, during the next week, would exert pressure on them to
accept a reasonable amount, and would call on her on the following
riday and tell her what they would take.  he made that appointment
with him."

"And, I hope, took advice in the meantime," muttered atherfield.
"Ought to have handed him over there and then"

"oshe took no advice in the meantime," continued Blenkinsop.
"adame istorelle was in arisaor enteney was away on business in
the country.  ady iversreade awaited Baseveries next coming.  When
he came he told her what his gang wantedthirty thousand pounds.  e
specified, too, the way in which it was to be paidin a fashion which
would have prevented the payment being traced to the people who
received it.  But now ady iversreade was more preparedshe had had
time to think.  he expected aor enteney next day she also knew
that her sister would return from aris on the following onday.  o
she told Baseverie that she would give him an answer on onday evening
if he would make an appointment to meet her at some place in ondon.
ventually they made an appointment at ivians, in andlestick
assage.  Baseverie went away next day ady iversreade told aor
enteney all that had happened.  As a result, he went with her to
ivians on onday evening.  hey waited an hour beyond the fixed time.
Baseverie made no appearance"

"ust so" muttered atherfield.  "e wouldntthe aor being there"

"erhaps," assented Blenkinsop.  "Anyway, he didnt materialise.  o
ady iversreade went away, leaving aor enteney behind her.  I may
say that he stopped there for some further time, keeping a sharp
lookout for the man whom ady iversreade had described in detaila
remarkable man in appearance, I understand.  But he never saw him."

"o" exclaimed atherfield cynically.  "Of course he didnt  But she
would ha doneif shed gone alone"

"Well, there it was," continued Blenkinsop.  "ow for ady iversreade.
he drove to her sisters flat in addington, and found adame
istorelle ust returned from aris.  he told her all that had
happened.  adame istorelle determined to go to ew ork at once and
get certain papers from her flat there which would definitely establish
her absolute innocence in the ellithwaite affair.  eaving ady
iversreade in the flat, adame istorelle set off for outhampton
before five oclock next morningyes"

atherfield, uttering a deep groan, smote his forehead.

"Aye" he muttered.  "ust so  o be sure  But go ongo on, sir."

"ou seem to be highly surprised," said Blenkinsop.  "oweverat
outhampton she booked a passage in a name she always used when
travellingher maiden nameby the artaric, sailing that afternoon.
hat done, she went to a hotel for lunch.  hen she began to think
things over more calmly.  And in the end, instead of sailing for ew
ork, she went back, cancelled her booking, and set off by train to
ord s country seat in Wiltshire, and told him the whole story.  he
wired to her sister as to what she had done, and in the evening wrote
to her.  eanwhile, ady iversreade had returned, early in the
morning, to iversreade ourt.  aor enteney went with her.  e was
confident that Baseverie would turn up.  e did turn up  But he did
not see ady iversreade.  e saw aor enteneyalone.  And aor
enteney, after a little plain talk to him, metaphorically kicked him
out, and told him to do his worst.  e wentwarned that if ever he
showed himself there again he would be handed over to the police."

atherfield groaned again, but the reason of his distress was obviously
of a different nature.

"A mistake, sira great mistake" he exclaimed, shaking his head at
enteney.  "ou shouldnt have let that fellow go like that  ou
should have handed him over there and then.  o  ou dont know where
he may be"

"Oh, well, were not quite such fools as we seem, atherfield," he
replied.  "When I went down to orking with ady iversreade on uesday
morning I had with me a smart man whom I can trust.  e saw Baseverie
arrive he saw Baseverie leave.  I think we shall be able to put our
fingers on Baseverie at any moment.  Our man wont lose sight of him"

"Oh, well, thats better, sir, thats much better" said atherfield.
"hats all right  A chap like that should be watched night and day.
But now, gentlemen, about this reward  our notion of offering it
sprang, of course, from this Baseverie business.  Buthow, exactly
id he mention annaford to ady iversreade"

"o" replied Blenkinsop.  "Ill tell you how we came to issue the
advertisement.  All unday afternoon and evening, and for some time on
onday morning, ady iversreade, aor enteney, and myself were in
close consultation about this affair.  Ill tell you at once how and
why we connected it with the poisoning of annaford, of which, of
course, all of us had read in the newspapers."

"Ayehow, now" asked atherfield.

"Because of this," answered Blenkinsop.  e tapped his desk to
emphasise his words, watching atherfield keenly as he spoke.  "Because
of this Baseverie told ady iversreade that the gang of blackmailers
had in their possession the original warrant for rs. Whittinghams
arrest"

etherwick felt himself impelled to ump in his chair, to exclaim
loudly.  e repressed the inclination, but atherfield was less
reserved.

"Ah" he exclaimed sharply.  "Ah"

"Baseverie made a false step there," continued Blenkinsop.  "e should
never have told that.  But he didno doubt he thought a rich woman
easy prey.  ow, of course, when we came to consult, we knew all about
the ellithwaite affair we knew, too, that annaford was
superintendent at the time and that he had the warrant it was not at
all improbable that he had preserved it in his pocketbook, and had it
on him when he came to ondon.  What, then, was the obvious
conclusionthat the men who now held that warrant had got it, probably
by foul means, from annaford, and were concerned in his murder
Andmore than thatdid the gang of which Baseverie spoke really
exist  Wasnt it likely that the gang wasBaseverie"

"Aye" muttered atherfield.  "Ive been thinking of that"

"et," said Blenkinsop, "it was on the cards that there might be a
gang.  We searched all the newspapers accounts thoroughly.  We found
that next to no information could be got as to annafords movements
between the time of his arrival in ondon and the night of his death.
he one man who might have given more information about annafords
doings on the evening preceding his deathranettwas dead, evidently
poisoned, as annaford was poisoned.  hese were circumstancestheyve
probably occurred to both of youwhich led us to believe that
annaford had formed the acquaintance of folk here in town who were of
a shady sort.  And one thing was absolutely certainif the gang, or if
Baseverie, had really got that warrant, they had got it from annaford
h"

"hat may be taken as certain," assented etherwick.  "ither directly
or indirectly, it must have been from him."

"We think they, or he, got it directly from him," said Blenkinsop.
"Our theory is that if there is a gang Baseverie is an active, perhaps
the leading, member that annaford was previously acquainted with him
or some other member that annaford was with him or them on the
evening preceding his death that he okingly told them that he had
discovered the identity of adame istorelle with rs. Whittingham and
that they poisoned himand ranett, as being presentin order to keep
the secret to themselves and to blackmail adame istorelle and her
sister, ady iversreade.  hats our general ideaand thats why, on
onday noon, we issued the advertisement.  We meant to keep things to
ourselves at first, and if substantial evidence came, to pass it over
to the police.  ow you know everything.  It may be, if there is a
gang, that one member will turn traitor for the sake of five thousand
pounds and if he can exculpate himself satisfactorily it may be, too,
that matters will develop until were in a position to fasten things on
Baseverie"

"I still wish that either ady iversreade or aor enteney had handed
him over to custody" said atherfield.  "ou see"

"ouve got to remember that Baseverie never demanded anything for
himself," interrupted enteney.  "e represented himself as a
gobetween.  But our mans safe enougha retired detective, and"

ust then a clerk opened the door and entered with a telegram.
Blenkinsop tore open the envelope, glanced hurriedly at the message and
flung the form on his desk with an exclamation of annoyance.

"his is from our man" he said.  "ent from over.  ollowed Baseverie
down thereand Baseveries slipped him"




A II

 O AB

enteney strode forward and picked up the telegram a moment later he
passed it over to etherwick.

"hats most unfortunate" he exclaimed.  "And unexpected, too  Of
course, the fellows slipped off to the ontinent."

atherfield looked over etherwicks shoulder and read the message.


"ollowed him down here last night.  ut up at same hotel, but he
slipped me and got clear away early this morning.  eturning now."


"ou should have employed two men, gentlemen," said atherfield.
"Ones not enoughin a case of that sort.  But its as I said
beforethis man should have been given into custody at once.
owever"

e got up from his chair, as if there was no more to be said, and moved
towards the door.  But halfway across the room he paused.

"oull let me know if anybody comes forward about that reward" he
suggested.  "Its more of a police matter, you know."

he two partners, who were obviously much annoyed by the telegram,
nodded.

"We shall let you knowat once," answered Blenkinsop.  "Of course,
youll regard all weve told you as strictly confidential"

"Oh, to be sure, sir," replied atherfield.  "Its not the only private
and confidential feature of this affair, I assure you."

Outside he turned to etherwick.

"Well" he said.  "Weve cleared up a few things, r. etherwickor,
rather, those two have cleared them up for us.  But are we any nearer
answering the question that we want answeringwho poisoned obert
annaford"

"I think we are" replied etherwick.  "I am, anyhow  ither Baseverie
poisoned himor he knows who did"

"nows who did" repeated atherfield.  "Ahthats more like it.  I
dont think he did ithe wouldnt be so ready about showing himself
forward."

"Im not so sure of that," remarked etherwick.  "rom what weve heard
of him, he seems to be a bold and daring sort of scamp.  robably he
thought hed have a very easy prey in ady iversreade probably, too,
he believed that a woman whos got all that money would make little to
do about parting with thirty thousand pounds.  One things sure,
howeverBaseverie knows what we want to know.  Andhes gone"

"erhapsperhaps" said atherfield.  "And perhaps not.  his man of
enteneys no doubt tracked him to over, and there he lost him, but
that isnt saying that Baseveries gone on the ontinent.  If
Baseveries the cute customer that he seems to be, hed put two and two
together when aor enteney warned him off iversreade ourt.  ed
probably suspect enteney of setting a watch on him he may have
spotted the very man who was watching.  hen, if hed any sense, hed
lead that man a bit of a dance, and eventually double on him.  oI
should say Baseveries back here in town  hats about it, r.
etherwick.  But whats this  eres one of my men coming to meet us.
I left word where I should be found."

etherwick looked up and saw a man, who was obviously a policeman in
plain clothes, coming towards them.  e was a quietlooking,
stodgyfaced man, but he had news written all over his plain face.

"Well, arler" inquired atherfield as they met.  "ot something"

here was nobody about in that quiet corner of incolns Inn ields,
yet the man looked round as if anxious to escape observation, and he
spoke in a whisper.

"I believe Ive got that chemist" he answered.  "eastways, its like
this.  heres a chemist I tried this morningname of acpherson, in
aiden ane.  I showed him the facsimiles of the lost labels on the
medicine bottles, and asked him if he could give me any information.
es a very cautious sort of man, I think he examined the facsimiles a
long time, saying nothing.  hen he said he supposed I was a policeman,
and so on, and of course I had to tell him a bitonly a bit.  hen he
said, all of a sudden, ook here, my friend, he said, youd better
tell me, straight outhas this to do with that annaford poisoning
case  o, of course, I said that, between ourselves, it had.  Isnt
atherfield in charge of that he said.  Of course, I said you were.
ery well he said.  ou send atherfield to me.  Im not going to
say anything to you, he said.  What Ive got to say Ill say to
atherfield.  o I went back to headquarters, and they told me youd
gone to incolns Inn ields."

"All right, my lad" said atherfield.  "If youve found the right man,
Ill remember you.  Whats his nameacpherson, aiden ane  ery
goodthen Ill ust step along and see him.  ot a word to anybody,
arler" he added, as the man turned away.  "eep close.  ow, this is
a bit of all right, r. etherwick" he continued, chuckling and
rubbing his hands.  "his beats all we heard at enteneys  Only let
me get the name and address of the man for whom that bottle of medicine
was made up, and I think I shall have taken a long stride  But come
alongwell see the chemist together."

he shop in aiden ane before which they presently paused was a small,
narrowfronted, oldfashioned establishment, with little in its windows
beyond the usual coloured bottles and over the front no more than the
name "acpherson" in faded gilt letters on a timestained signboard.
It was dark and stuffy within the shop, and etherwick had to strain
his eyes to see a tall, thin, elderly, spectacled man, very precise and
trim in appearance, who stood behind the single counter, silently
regarding him and atherfield.

"r. acpherson" inquired atherfield.  "ust so  ood morning, sir.
y name is atherfieldInspector atherfield.  One of my men tells
me"

"One moment" interrupted the chemist.  e stepped behind a screen at
the rear of his shop and presently returned with a young man, to whom
he whispered a word or two.  hen he beckoned to his two visitors, and
opening a door at the further corner, ushered them into a private
parlour.  "We shall be to ourselves here, r. atherfield," he said.
"And Ive no doubt your business is of a highly confidential nature."

"omething of that sort, r. acpherson," assented atherfield, as he
and etherwick took chairs at a centre table.  "But my manll have
prepared you a bit, no doubt.  e tells me he showed you the
photographed facsimiles of certain torn labels that are on a medicine
bottle which figures in the annaford case, and that in consequence of
your seeing them you asked to see me.  Well, sir, here I am"

"Aye, ust so, r. atherfield, ust so, precisely," replied the
chemist, turning up the gaset which hung above the table.  "Aye, to
be sure"  e, too, sat down at the table, and folded his thin long
fingers together.  "Aye, and youll be thinking, r. atherfield, that
yon bottle has something to do with the poisoning of annaford"

"Ill be candid with you, r. acpherson," answered atherfield.  "But
first let me ask you something.  ave you read the newspaper accounts
of this affair"

"Ive done that, r. atherfieldyes, all I could lay hands on."

"hen youll be aware that there was another man poisoned as well as
annaforda man named ranett, who was in annafords company on the
night when it all happened  his gentleman here is the one that was in
the nderground train and saw annaford die, and ranett make off, as
he said, to fetch a doctor."

"hatll be r. etherwick, Im thinking," said the chemist, with a
polite bow.  "Aye, ust so"

"I see youve read the reports of the inquest," remarked atherfield,
with a smile.  "ery well, as I say, ranett was found dead later.  I
discovered a medicine bottle and a glass at his bedside.  hered been
whisky in both, but according to the medical experts there had also
been poisonthe traces, they say, were indisputable.  ow, on that
medicine bottle were two torn labelson the upper one, as you see from
the facsimile photograph, theres been a name writtenall thats left
is the initial . and the first letter of a surname, A.  All the rests
gone.  And what I want to know isare you the chemist that made up the
medicine or the tonic, or whatever it was, that was in that bottle,
and, if so, who is the customer for whom you made it, and whose
hristian name begins with . and surname with A.  o you comprehend
me"

"Aye, aye, r. atherfield" answered the chemist eagerly.  "Im
appreciating every word youre saying, and very lucid it all is.  And
Im willing to give you all the information in my power, but first Id
ust like to have a bit myself on a highly pertinent matter.  ow,
youll be aware, r. atherfield, if youve seen the newspapers of this
last day or two, that theres a firm of solicitors in incolns Inn
ields thats offering a reward of five thousand pounds"

"Im well enough aware of it, r. acpherson," interrupted atherfield
with a laugh and a sly glance at etherwick.  "r. etherwick and
myself have ust come straight from their office, and what you want to
know isif you give me information will it be the same thing as giving
it to them  ou want to make sure about the reward"

"recisely, r. atherfield, precisely" assented the chemist eagerly.
"ouve hit my meaning exactly.  or, of course, when theres a reward
like yon"

"If you give us information, r. acpherson, thatll lead to the arrest
and conviction of the guilty party, you can rest assured youll get
that reward," said atherfield.  "And r. etherwickll support me in
that, Im sure."

"Im satisfiedIm satisfied, gentlemen" exclaimed acpherson, as
etherwick murmured his confirmation.  "Well, its a strange, black
business, and Id no idea that I would come to be associated with it
until that man of yours called in this morning, r. atherfield.  But
then I knew  And Ill shorten matters by telling you, at onceI made
up the tonic that was in that bottle"

atherfield rubbed his hands.

"ood" he said quietly.  "ood  And now, thenthe critical question
or whom"

"or a r. harles Ambrose, from a prescription of his own," replied
acpherson.  "Its a sort of pickmeup tonic.  I first made it up for
him two years ago Ive made it up for him several times since.  he
last occasion was about six weeks ago.  I have all the dates, though,
in my books I can show you them."

"Wait a bit," said atherfield.  "hats of no great importanceyet.
r. harles Ambrose, eh  ave you his address"

"Aye, to be sure" answered the chemist.  "is address is , umber
, ohn treet."

"Adelphi" suggested atherfield.

"Adelphi, precisely, umber , ohn treet, Adelphi," repeated
acpherson.  "hats in the books, too."

atherfield suddenly became silent, staring at the floor.  When he
looked up again it was at etherwick.

"idnt ranett exclaim that he knew of a doctor, close by, when he
rushed out of that train at haring ross nderground" he asked.
"ave the impression that he knew of one close by, anyway"

"e said distinctly close by," answered etherwick.  "Why, are you
thinking"

atherfield interrupted him with a wave of the hand, and turned again
to the chemist.  "ouve seen this r. harles Ambrose" he asked
abruptly.

"Oh, I have, r. atherfield, many a time and often," replied
acpherson.  "But now I come to think of it, not lately."

"Whenlast" demanded atherfield.

"I should think last when he called in and told me to make him another
bottle of his tonic," answered acpherson, after some thought.  "As I
said ust now, perhaps about six weeks ago.  But the books"

"ever mind the books yet.  Whats this r. harles Ambrose like"

"A tall, handsome man, distinguishedlookingI should say about forty
years of age.  A dark manhair, eyes, beard.  e wears his moustache
and beard inwell, a sort of foreign fashion in fact, hes more like
a paniard than an nglishman."

"Butis he an nglishman"

"e was always taken by me for an nglishman he speaks like onethat
is, like an nglishman of the upper classes.  e once told me he was an
Oxford manwed been talking about universities."

"Welldressed man"

"Aye, he was that  A smart, fine man."

"id you ever see him in a big, dark overcoat, with a large white silk
muffler about his neck and the lower part of his face"

"Aye, Ive seen him like that  On chilly evenings.  Indeed, thats
another thing he told mehe was subect to bronchial attacks."

"uffled himself well up, eh" suggested atherfield.

"Aye, ust so  es been in here like that."

atherfield turned to etherwick with a significant glance.

"hats the man who met annaford at ictoria tation that nightthe
man that edbitter saw, and that nobodys seen since" he exclaimed.
"A million to one on it  ow then, who is he"

"ou know his name and his address," remarked etherwick.

"esand I know, too, that r. acpherson here hasnt seen him
lately" retorted atherfield dryly.  "ow often, now, r. acpherson,
did you use to see him  I mean, did you use to see him at other times
than when he came into your shop"

"Oh, yes  Ive seen him in the street, outside," replied the chemist.
"Ive seen him, too, going in and out of ules, and in and out of
omanos."

"In other words," remarked atherfield, "he was pretty well known about
this end of the trand.  Im not sure, now, that I dont remember such
a man myselfblack, silky, carefullytrimmed beard, always a big
swell.  Butr. acpherson hasnt seen him lately  m  o you know
if he was in practice, r. acpherson"

"I could not say as to that, r. atherfield.  eeing that he called
himself r. Ambrose, I supposed he was a medical practitioner, but I
dont know what his degrees or qualifications were at all."

atherfield glanced at a row of books which stood over a desk at the
side of the parlour.

"ave you got an uptodate medical directory" he asked.  "ood
ets look the man up.  ou turn up his name, r. etherwick," he went
on as the chemist handed down a volume "youre more used to books than
I am.  ind out if theres anything about him."

etherwick turned over the pages of the directory, and presently shook
his head.

"heres no harles Ambrose here," he said.  "ook for yourselves."

atherfield glanced at the place indicated and said nothing.
acpherson made an exclamation of surprise.

"Aye, well, he may be a foreigner, after all," he observed.  "But I
shouldnt have considered him one, and he certainly told me he was an
Oxford graduate."

"oreigner or Oxforder, Im going to know more about him" declared
atherfield, rising and grasping his stick with an air of
determination.  "Well, r. acpherson, were obliged to you, and if
this results in anythingyou know  But for the momenta bit of that
caution that you cotsmen are famous foreh"

Outside, atherfield laid his hand on etherwicks elbow.

"r. etherwick," he said solemnly, "were on the trackat last  ure
as my names atherfield, weve hit the trail  ow were going to ohn
treet, Adelphiand Ill lay you anything you like that the mans
vanished"




A III

 A

etherwick followed his companion across the trand, into the Adelphi,
and to the house they wantedan old Adams mansion, now divided into
flats.  atherfield did not take the trouble to ascend to the upper
regions he sought and found a caretaker and put a question to him.
he man shook his head.

"r. Ambrose, sir" he replied.  "Oh, yes, r. Ambrose lives here.
But he aint in, siraint at home, in fact.  es been away three
weeks or sodont know where he is."

With a meaning look at etherwick, atherfield drew the caretaker aside
and talked to him for a few moments the man presently turned and went
downstairs to the basement from which they had summoned him.

"hats all right," remarked atherfield, with a wink.  "es going to
let us into Ambroses flat.  idnt I tell you we shouldnt find
Ambrose here  ot he  I should say hes off"

"upposing he returnswhile were here" asked etherwick.

"Wish he would" chuckled atherfield.  "obody I want to see more  If
he did, why, I should ust ask him to take a little walk with meto
explain a few matters.  But he wont  eres the man.  Well go up."

he caretaker reappeared with a bunch of keys and led the way to a flat
at the top of the old house.  e unlocked a door and stood aside.

"ou neednt wait," said atherfield.  "Ill shut the place up again
when we leave and let you know.  All right."

e walked in, with etherwick at his heels, as soon as the caretaker
had gone, and, once inside, closed the door carefully upon himself and
his companion.  But etherwick, after a first glance at the
sittingroom into which they had entered, a somewhat untidy, shabbily
furnished place, went straight to the hearth and pointed to a framed
photograph, timestained and faded, which hung over the mantelpiece.

"heres a striking and significant piece of evidenceat once" he
exclaimed.  "o you know what that is, atherfield"

atherfield looked in the direction indicated, and shook his head.

"ot the slightest idea" he answered.  "I see its a photograph of
some old church or otherthats all."

"hats the famous arish hurch of ellithwaite" said etherwick.
"One of the very finest in ngland  I had a look at itonly a mere
lookwhen I was down there.  ow then, whats this man doing with a
picture of ellithwaite arish hurch in his rooms  annaford came
from ellithwaite"

"hats a mighty significant thing, anyway," agreed atherfield.
"Were getting at something this morning" e looked more carefully at
the photograph.  "rand old building, as you say," he continued.  "Of
course, the mere fact of his having it put up there shows that hes
some interest in it.  ellithwaite man, likely.  But well find all
that out.  ow lets look round."

here was little to see, etherwick thought.  he flat consisted of a
sittingroom and bedroom and a small bathroom.  he furniture was
plain, old, rather shabby the whole place suggested that its occupant
was not over welltodo the only signs of affluence to be seen were
manifested in the toilet articles on the dressingtable, in a
luxurious, if wellworn, dressinggown which hung on the rail of the
bed, and in the presence of carefully folded and pressed garments laid
out in the bedroom.  here were a few books, chiefly medical treatises,
in shelves in the sittingroom a few personal pictures, mainly of
college and school groups, on the walls and a desk in the centre,
littered with more books, writing materials, and papers.  atherfield
began to turn them over.

"ee that" he exclaimed suddenly, pointing to a movable calendar which
stood on the top ledge of the desk.  "otice the date  arch th
hats the day on which annaford got his quietus.  At least, strictly
speaking, it was the day before.  annaford actually died on the
nineteenthaboutwhat was itvery early in the morning, anyway.
Whats one to gather from thisthat Ambrose hasnt been here since
the eighteenth.  ohallo"

urning over the loose papers that lay about the blottingpad, he had
suddenly lighted upon a telegram ust as suddenly he thrust it into
etherwicks hands.

"ook at that" he exclaimed.  "ow, that is a find  Biggest weve
ever hadso far"

etherwick read the apparently innocent message.


"All right.  Will meet you ictoria bookstall this evening as
suggested.

"annaford."


"ee the date" said atherfield excitedly.  "arch th  ow weve
got at it  Ambrose was the man that met annaford at ictoria, the
tall, muffledup man that edbitter saw  hatscertain"

"eems so," agreed etherwick.  e was still studying the telegram.
"ent off from leet treet twelvefifteen that day," he muttered.
"esthere doesnt seem much doubt about this.  I wonder who this man
Ambrose is"

"Well soon get to know something about that, r. etherwick"
exclaimed atherfield briskly.  "ow, Im ust going to put that wire
in my pocket, lock up this flat again, have another word or two with
that caretaker chap, and go in search of the information you refer to.
ome with me  ater, I shall get a search warrant, and make a thorough
examination of this flat.  ets be moving."

ownstairs again, atherfield called up the caretaker.

"ou say r. Ambrose has been away for a bit" he asked.  "Is there
anything unusual in that"

"Well, not so very," answered the man.  "ver since he came here, two
or three years ago, hes been used to going away for a while.  I
believe he used to go over to aris.  But I never remember him being
away more than a week at a time before."

"vidently hes a doctor," suggested atherfield.  "id he ever have
patients come to see him here"

he caretaker shook his head.

"o," he replied.  "e never had anybody much come to see him
herenever remember anybody, unless it was somebody he brought in at
night for a smoke, you know.  e generally went out early in a morning,
and came home latevery late."

"What about his meals" asked atherfield.

"ed no meals hereunless he made himself a cup of coffee or so in a
morning," said the caretaker.  "All his meals outbreakfast, too.
undays as well as weekdays.  We saw very little of him."

"Who does up his roomsmakes the bed and so on" inquired atherfield.

"y wife," answered the caretaker.  "he does all that."

"And she hasnt had anything to do forhow long"

"Well, itll be three weeks, Im sure.  e never used to say anything
at any time when he went offust went.  ed call downstairs when he
came back and let us know he was back, dye see  But we never thought
hed be as long away as this, this time.  It was only this morning,
ust before you came, that my missus said to me that it seemed queer."

"Why queer"

"Because hes taken nothing with him.  owever short a time he might be
away before, he always took a suitcase, clean linen, shaving things,
so onhe was a very particular gentleman about his appearancealways
dressed like a swell and had a clean shirt every day used to have a
nice heavy washingbill, anyhow"

"id he seem to be pretty well supplied with money" asked atherfield.
"Orthe opposite"

"ouldnt rightly say," replied the caretaker.  "Always paid his rent,
and us, and the washing regular, but as for anything else, why, wed no
means of knowing.  Of course, as I tell you, he always looked the
gentleman."

"I see" said atherfield.  "All rightyoull see me again this
afternoon."

e strode away towards the trand, and there ushered etherwick into
the first empty taxicab they met.

"Where now" asked etherwick as atherfield followed him into the cab
after a word to its driver.

"Were going now, sir, to allam treet, to the offices of the eneral
edical ouncil," answered atherfield promptly.  "Ive had experience
of inquiring into the antecedents of medical men before, and I know
where to find out all about any of em.  Im going to find out all
about this r. harles Ambrosethat is, of course, if hes an nglish
doctor."

"robably he isnt," remarked etherwick, "any more than Baseverie is."

"Ah, Baseverie" exclaimed atherfield.  "Id forgotten that man for
the time being  Well, while were about it, well see if we can
unearth a bit of information concerning him.  Weve done a bit of good
work this morning, ye know, r. etherwick" he went on, rubbing his
hands with satisfaction.  "Weve practically made certain that Ambrose
was the man who met annaford at ictoria, and were sure hes the man
to whom acpherson supplied the bottle in which the poison was
discovered at ranetts room.  And now well hope for a bit more
illumination in the darkness"

etherwick presently found himself closeted with atherfield and a
grave official who, after seeing atherfields credentials and
listening to his reasons for his visit of inquiry, began to consult
various books of reference.  resently he left the room and was away
some time when he returned he brought with him two slips of paper,
which he handed to atherfield.

"I have had the particulars you require written out for you," he said,
"so you can examine them at your leisure.  I" here he smiled
frostily"I gather that you are somewhat anxious to get in touch with
these men"

"I think its extremely probable, sir, that before the days over I
shall be exceedingly anxious to get in touch with both" answered
atherfield, with something very like a wink.  "ore than anxious"

he grave official nodded and smiled again, and atherfield and
etherwick went away.  Outside atherfield looked right and left.

"r. etherwick," he said, "its well past twelve, and Id my breakfast
before eightIm hungry  ets turn into the first decent place we
see and get a bite and a sup  And well examine these papers."

e presently led etherwick into the saloon bar of a tavern, and
remarking that he had a taste for ale and bread and cheese at that time
of day, provided himself with these matters and retreated to a snug
corner, whither etherwick followed him with a whisky and soda.

"eres success to our endeavours, r. etherwick" said atherfield,
lifting his tankard.  "Im now firmly under the impression that were
adding link after link to the chain  But lets see what weve got here
in this crabbed writing."

e laid the slips of paper on the table at which they sat both bent
over them.  here were not many words on either, but to etherwick they
were significant enough in their plain straightforwardness.


harles Ambrose, .B.  (Oxon).  edical Officer of ealth, rayport,
ancs,  in practice Whiteburn, ancs,  police
surgeon, ellithwaite, W.., orks,  in practice Brondesbury,
ondon, .  truck off egister by eneral edical ouncil for
unprofessional conduct, .


"o much for him" muttered atherfield, his cheek bulging with bread
and cheese.  "I thought it would turn out to be something of that sort
ow tother"


yprian Baseverie, ...., ....  In practice Birmingham,
 at Wyborough, orthants,  at alston, .,
, onvicted of fraud at entral riminal ourt, , and
struck off egister by eneral edical ouncil, .


"oho" exclaimed atherfield.  "Been in the dock already, has he
Well, well, r. etherwick, we continue to learn, sir  We know still
more.  Baseveries a convicted criminal.  Both have been struck off the
register.  Ambrose was certainly at ellithwaiteand hed be there,
according to these dates, at the time of the Whittingham affair.  A
promising pairfor our purpose  What do you think"

"Im wondering if the two men know each other," answered etherwick.

"houldnt wonder," said atherfield.  "robably they do.  robably
theyre mixed up together in this affair.  robably theyre actual
partners in itaccessories to each other.  But now that I know this
much about them, I can find out more, especially about Ambrose, as he
was a police surgeon.  I can find out, too, what Baseveries particular
crime was.  efrauding a patient, I should imagine.  But Ill put one
or two men on to working up particulars and records of both Baseverie
and Ambrose this afternoon, and, of course, I shall go back and
thoroughly examine that flat in ohn treet."

"And, I suppose, in view of the evidence supplied by acpherson, set up
a search for Ambrose" suggested etherwick.

"o be sure  Well get out a tracked by the police notice,
describing him to the best of our power," replied atherfield.  "But
Ill tell youin my opinion itll be a stiff ob getting hold of him.
If you want my opinion, as a private individual, hes probably got that
secret invention of annafords and gone off across the Atlantic with
itto turn it into money."

"hats very likely," assented etherwick.  "But what about Baseverie"

"Im not so much concerned about him now," said atherfield.  "Ambrose
seems to be the man I wantfirst, anyway.  But I shall do what I can
to get hold of Baseverie.  If these enteney and Blenkinsop people had
only come to us instead of laying plans of their own, some good would
have been done.  I shouldnt have let the man got away"

"y belief," observed etherwick, "is that Baseverie and Ambrose are
partners in this affair.  Andhow do we know that they didnt meet at
over, and that they havent gone off together"

till wondering about this, etherwick next morning went round to
incolns Inn ields and asked to see one of the partners.  e was
shown into the room in which he and atherfield had had their interview
on the previous day.  But he found aor enteney alone.  Blenkinsop,
remarked the unior partner, had business in the ourts that morning.

"I called," explained etherwick, "to ask if you had any more
information about Baseveries disappearance at over."

enteney made a wry face.

"ore vexed than ever about that" he answered.  "ost inexcusably
stupid conduct on the part of our manman weve always found so
reliable previously.  e came back yesterday afternoon, crestfallen,
told us all about it, and got a olly good wigging.  ed done well at
first.  racked his man from iversreade ourt to orking, and thence
to edhill, and thence to over, after one or two changes.  Baseverie
put up at some hotelI forget whichnear the harbour our man,
certain that Baseverie was quite unconscious that he was being
followed, put up there, too.  othing happened.  e saw Baseverie at
dinner that night, saw him in the smokingroom after in fact, he had a
game of billiards with him, and saw him retire to bed their rooms were
adacent.  e felt sure of seeing him at breakfast, but when he went
down he found that the bird had flownflown, said the night porter,
before six oclock he didnt know where.  or could our man trace him
at station or pier, or anywhere."

"areless sort of watching," said etherwick.

"Worse than careless" agreed enteney.  "As I said, he caught it hot.
But now"

he telephone bell on Blenkinsops desk rang.  With a word of excuse
enteney turned to it.  A moment later a smothered eaculation of
surprise came from him, followed by a sharp interrogation on his part.
uddenly he turned on etherwick.

"ood heavens" he exclaimed.  "Whats all this  his is ady
iversreade speaking.  he says her sister, who came yesterday, and
iss eatherstone have been kidnapped  idnappedthis morning"

etherwick leapt to his feet with a sharp exclamationhalf amazed,
half incredulous.  But already his thoughts were with hona he saw the
dangers of the situation for her as enteney could not see them.

"Impossible" he said.  "idnapped in broad daylight  Andfrom
there"

But enteney was still busy at the telephone, giving and receiving
rapid answers.

"es, yes" he was saying.  "o be surepoliceyes  Im coming
straight there nowcartell the police to get busy."

e turned sharply to etherwick as he laid down the instrument.

"ear theres no impossibility about it" he said.  "ady iversreade
says they were carried off as they crossed from the ourt to the
omeshes heard something of a big car with strange men in it.  Im
going down there at oncetheres more in this affair than one sees at
first."

"Ill come with you," said etherwick.  "Where can we get a cara fast
one"

"arage close by, in ingsway," answered enteney, hurriedly seizing on
one of several greatcoats that hung in a recess.  "ereget into one
of theseyoure about my height, and the airs still nippy, motoring.
ow come onwell be there in under the hour.  ou know," he
continued, as they left the office and hastened towards ingsway, "I
think I see through something of this already, etherwick.  hese
fellows probably believed they were kidnapping ady iversreadeand
got her sister in mistake for her.  ansom, you know  he blackmailing
dodge failednow theyre trying this.  A desperate and daredevil lot,
evidently"

etherwick nodded a silent assent.  e was wondering whether or not to
tell enteney that the iss eatherstone of whom he had ust spoken was
in reality the granddaughter of the man whose mysterious murder
appeared to be the startingpoint of the more recent, equally
mysterious events.  hat fact, it seemed to him, would have to come out
sooner or laterand there might be possible complications, perhaps
unpleasantness, when ady iversreade discovered that hona had gone to
her as a spy.  ight it not be well to take enteney into his
confidence and explain matters  But, on reflection, he decided to wait
until they knew the exact situation at iversreade ourt so far, in
spite of ady iversreades news he felt it difficult to believe that
two women, one of them, to his knowledge, a girl of character and
resource, and the other a woman of the world, used to travelling and to
adventure, could be carried off in broad daylight in immediate prospect
of two large housesthe thing seemed impossible.




A I

 OO OA

ome fifty minutes later, the big, powerful car, which enteney had
commissioned in ingsway, dashed up to iversreade ourt.  etherwick
found that there had been no exaggeration in ady iversreades
telephone message.  he herself came hurrying out to meet them there
were men standing about the terrace outside and others visible in the
park a couple of uniformed policemen followed ady iversreade from
her study, where etherwick supposed her to have been in consultation
with them.  And her first glance was directed on etherwick himself
she addressed him before enteney could go through any hurried
introduction.

"Ive seen you before" she exclaimed abruptly.  "ou were with my
secretary, iss eatherstone, at ictoria, unday morning.  Are you
engaged to her"

"o" replied etherwick.  "But we are close friends."

"Well, iss eatherstones been run away withand so has my sister,
adame istorelle," continued ady iversreade.  "hats the long and
short of it  ou seemed almost incredulous when I rang you up," she
continued, turning to enteney, "but theres no doubt about ittheyve
been kidnapped, under my very windows.  And we havent a single clue, a
trace of any sort."

"o far, you mean," answered enteney coolly.  "But comebut let me
hear all about it.  What are the details"

"etails" exclaimed ady iversreade.  "We dont know any details
All I know is thismy sister came here from ampshire yesterday
evening, to stay a few days.  his morning, after we had breakfasted,
she and iss eatherstone set out across the park for the ome, leaving
me hereI meant to follow in a few minutes.  I did followI wasnt
ten minutes behind them.  But when I got to the ome, they werent
there, and itchell, the man at the door, said they hadnt come.  hey
didnt come  ventually, I came back here, to find out if something
had happened and theyd returned by some other way.  But they werent
here.  hen I began to make some inquiry.  One of the housemaids, whod
been looking out of a top window, said shed seen a car go at a great
rate down the middle drive in the direction of the high road soon after
adame istorelle and iss eatherstone left the house.  And of course
theres no doubt about ittheyve been carried off in that  his is
more work of that man Baseveries"

"ou said something over the phone about strange men being seen in the
car," remarked enteney.

"Oh, thatyes, the same girl said she thought she could see two men
sitting in the car," answered ady iversreade.  "Of course theyd be
strange."

enteney turned to the policemen, at the same time tapping etherwicks
arm.  "I think wed better go across the park and see for ourselves if
there are any signs of a struggle at any particular place," he said.
"I dont think either adame istorelle or iss eatherstone likely
persons to be carried off without making a fight for it.  ave you been
across the grounds yet" he added, to the elder of the two men.  "I
mean by the path they took"

"ot yet, sir weve only ust arrived," answered the man.

"ome along, then," said enteney.  e lingered a moment as etherwick
and the policemen left the hall, and said a few words to ady
iversreade then he hurried out and headed his party.  "his way," he
continued, leading etherwick along the terrace, "I know the usual
route to the omeplain sailing from here to there, except at one
spot, and there, I conclude, whatever has happened did happen"

etherwick paid particular attention to the route along which enteney
led his party.  he path went straight across the park, from the end of
the terrace at the ourt to near the front entrance of the ome, and
from the ourt itself it looked as if there was no break in it.  But
about halfway between the two houses there was an important break
which could not be seen until pedestrians were close upon it.
ransecting the park from its southern to its northern boundaries was a
sunk roadwaythe middle drive to which ady iversreade had
referredgained from the park above, on each side, by ornamental
steps.  Whatever happened in that roadway, etherwick saw at once,
could not have been seen from the higher ground above, save by anyone
close to its edge.  But two or three hundred yards or so from the
steps, which made a continuation of the path, the embankments of the
sunk road flattened out into the lower stretches of the park, and there
the road itself could be seen from the top windows of the ourt, and
from those of the ome also.

enteney paused at the top of the ornamental steps.

"If these two ladies have been carried off, as they certainly seem to
have been," he said, turning to his companions, "this is the spot
ow, ust let me explain the lie of the land.  he main road edges the
park at the northern end, as you all know.  But there is a good road at
the southern extremity, and the sunk road runs down from it.  A car
could come down from there, be pulled up here, and kept waiting until
the two ladies came along.  hey would have to descend these steps,
cross the road, and ascend the steps on the other bank to get to the
other half of the park.  ow suppose theyre forced into a car at the
foot of the stepsthe car goes off for the main road and gets clear
away within a minute or two of the kidnapping taking place  heres
the difficulty  he thing would be easy to dogranted force.
robably, the two captives were forced into the car at the point of
revolvers."

"hats about it, sir" agreed the elder of the policemen.  "o choice
in the matter, poor things  And, as you say, theyd be in and
offmiles offbefore they fairly knew what had happened."

"ome down and lets see the roadway," said enteney.

But there was nothing to see at the foot of the steps.  he road, like
all roads and paths on the iversreade ourt property, was in a perfect
state of repair, and there was scarcely a grain of dust on its
spickandspan, artificially treated and smoothed surface certainly
there were no signs of any struggle.

"hats how its been, you may depend upon it," observed enteney to
etherwick as they looked about.  "he men were waiting here with
revolvers.  heyd force them into the car and get in after them a
third man, an accomplice, would drive off.  If only we had some more
definite information about the car and its occupants"

"heres an old chap coming down the road who seems to have his eye on
us," remarked etherwick, looking round.  "e may have something to
tell.  After all, some of the people hereabouts must have seen the car"

he old man, evidently a labourer, came nearer, looking inquiringly
from one to the other.  e had the air of one who can tell something on
occasion.

"Be you gentlemen aenquirin about a motycar what was round here this
mornin" he asked, as he came up.  "I hear there was somebody aaskin
questions that way, so I ust come downalong, like."

"We are," answered enteney.  "o you know anything"

he old man pointed up the sunk road to a part of the park where it was
lost amongst trees and coppices.

"ives up there, I do," he said.  "y cottage, it be ust behind they
trees, tother side o the road what this here runs into my garden, it
runs down to the edge o that road.  And when I was agardenin this
morningmebbe bout halfpastnine oclock, that wasI sees a
motycar what come along from your way, and turns into this here sunk
road.  ebbe thats what youre atalkin bout"

"o doubt," agreed enteney.  "And were much obliged to you.  ow what
sort of a car was it  losed, or open"

"Oh, twas closed up, same as one o they old cabs what us dont see no
more now," said the old man.  "But I see inside it, for all that.  wo
gentlemen."

"wo gentlemen, eh" repeated enteney.  "ust so.  And a driver
outside, of course."

"Oh, aye there was a driver outside, to be sure.  In livery, he
waslike a gentlemans servant.  mart feller"

"ould you describe the gentlemen"

"o, surelytwo gentlemen, though asitting back, I sees em  And
sees the motycar, too, turn down this here very road."

"What sort of car was it" inquired enteney.  "What colour was it
painted"

"Well, now, you beats me  It med be a sort o greyish colouror
again, it med be a sort o yaller, lightish yaller, or it med be
drabbishI couldn zacly go to for say what it was, proper.  But a
lightish colour."

"ightishgrey, yellow, or drabsomething of that sort"

"urely  er wasnt a dark un, anyhow.  But the feller what drove,
now he were in a dark liveryI took particlar notice of he, cause he
was so smart as never was.  reen that was his colour, and gold lace.
ooked like a duke, he did  And I thought, hearin as there was them
in the park as was inquirin, like, as ow Id come and tell ee."

enteney rewarded the informant with some silver, and turned to his
companions with a shake of the head.

"A lightcoloured car with two men in it, driven by a man who wore a
darkgreen livery with gold lace on it" he remarked.  "hats about
all were likely to get.  Andif this has been a carefullyplanned
affair, the chauffeur would change his livery before theyd gone
farslip another coat on  owever"

hey went back to the ourt, consulting together obviously, there was
nothing to do but to send out inquiries in the surrounding country.
enteney was sceptical about the success of these.

"When one considers the thousands of cars to be seen in any given area
during one morning," he said, "how can one expect that anybody, even
rustics, should give special attention to any particular one  heres
no doubt about ittheyve got clean away"

It seemed as if nothing could be done but to give the kidnapping full
publicity through the police and the press.  In the neighbourhood of
the ourt nobody beyond the housemaid and the old cottager appeared to
have seen the car and its occupants.  But during the afternoon, as
etherwick and enteney were about to set out for ondon, a man came to
the house and asked to see ady iversreade.  ady iversreade went out
to him the two men accompanied her, and found at the hall door an
elderly, respectablelooking fellow who had driven up in a light cart.
e had heard, he said, of what had happened at iversreade ourt that
morning, and he believed he could tell something, for he was sure that
he had seen a car, such as that the police were inquiring after, pass
his house.

"And where is that" asked ady iversreade.

"About two miles the other side of orking, my lady, on the ondon
oad.  Im a market gardenername of homas hillam.  And I was
outside my garden gate this morning, about, as near as I can reckon,
ten oclock, when I saw a car, lightcoloured, coming from orking, at
a particularly high speeda good deal faster than it had any right to
do  I watched it careful, my lady.  But ust as it got near to my
place, there was a man drove some sheep out of a bylane, a few yards
past my garden and the car was obliged to slow down.  And so I saw the
folks in it."

"es" said ady iversreade.  "Andwho was in it"

"here was a couple of men, my lady, on the front seat, and a couple of
ladies in the back.  Of course, it was a closed car, but I saw em,
plain enough, all four.  It seemed to me as if they were all either
quarrelling or having high wordsthey were all talking together,
anyway.  But though the car had slowed down cause of the sheep, it was
still moving at a fair pace, and, of course, they were past and gone,
ondon way, in a minute, as it were.  All the same, I saw em clearly
enough to see that one of the men inside was a man Ive seen before."

"About here" exclaimed ady iversreade.

"o, my lady," answered hillam.  "In ondon.  Its this way, my
ladyme and my missis, weve a grownup daughter whats in service in
ondonrosvenor ardens.  ow and again we go up to see her, and stop
a night or two close by.  And of course we take a look round.  ow Ive
seen that man two or three times about ictoria tation wayI knew him
at once when I saw him this morning, and"

"ust tell us what hes like, will you" interrupted enteney.  "As
near as you can."

"Well, sir, I aint good at that, but hes a tall, goodlooking,
smartdressed gentleman, with a beard and moustachetaller nor what
you and that other gentleman is, sir.  I seen him in ictoria
treetmebbe it was his height made me notice him."

"And youre sure that was the man you saw in the car this morning"

"ake no doubt on it, sir  Im as certain as that I see yourself.  Oh,
yes"

etherwick put in a question.

"he second man in the car  id you notice him  an you remember him"

hillam reflected for awhile.

"I remember that he was a whitefaced chap," he said at last.  "Wore a
tophat, silk."

When hillam had gone away, etherwick turned to his companions.

"hat sounds like Ambrose, for one man, and Baseverie for the other,"
he said.  "What devilry are they up to now  enteneywe must get back
to ondon"




A 

OI A

It was an hour later when they pulled up at atherfields headquarters
and went in to find him.  atherfield, brought to them after some
search, rubbed his hands at sight of them.

"ome at the right moment" he exclaimed, "Ive got newsof Ambrose"

atherfield evidently expected his visitors to show deep interest, if
not passive enthusiasm, in respect of this announcement, and he stared
wonderingly on seeing that their faces showed nothing but gloom and
concern.

"But youyou look as if youd had bad news" he exclaimed.  "omething
gone wrong"

"I forgot that we might have telephoned you from iversreade ourt,"
replied etherwick, suddenly realising that atherfield seemed to know
nothing of the days happening.  "But I thought the orking police
would do that.  one wrongyes, and it may have to do with
Ambroseweve heard news that seems to fit in with him.  But its
this," he went on to give atherfield a brief account of the days
events.  "here you are" he concluded.  "Ive no doubt whatever that
Baseverie and Ambrose are in at thiskidnapping in broad daylight.
atherfield, youve got to find them"

atherfield had listened with close attention to etherwicks story,
and now he looked from him to enteney from enteney to a printed bill
which lay on his desk at his side.  "I think I see what all this is
about," he remarked, after a pause.  "hose chaps think theyve gotor
they thought they gotady iversreade  o hold for ransom, of
course.  hey took iss annaford because she chanced to be there.
What they really kidnappedand theres more of that done than you
gentlemen might think, I can tell youwas ady iversreades sister.
But now, however sisterstwin sistersmay closely resemble each
other, there comes a time when difference of identitys bound to come
out.  By this timeperhaps long beforethose men must have discovered
that they laid hands on the wrong woman  And the question iswhat
would they do then"

"It seems to me that the more immediate question iswhere are the two
women" exclaimed etherwick.  "hink of their danger"

"Oh, well, r. etherwick, I dont suppose theyre in any personal
danger," answered atherfield.  "heyre in the hands of brigands, no
doubt, but I dont think therell be any maltreatment of themset your
mind at rest about that.  hey dont do that sort of thing nowadays
its all done politely and with every consideration, I believe.  As to
where they are  Why, somewhere in ondon  And there are over seven
millions of other people in ondon, and hundreds upon hundreds of
thousands of inhabited housesa lot of needles in that bundle of hay,
gentlemen"

"heyve got to be found" repeated etherwick doggedly.  "oull have
to set all your machinery to work  his cant"

"Wait a bit, etherwick," interrupted enteney.  e turned to
atherfield.  "ou said you had news of this man Ambrose  What news"

atherfield tapped the printed bill which lay on his desk.

"I had that circulated broadcast this morning," he answered.  "And
then, of course, the newspapers have helped.  Well, not so very long
before you came in, I was called to the telephone by a man named
illiner, who told me he was the landlord of the reen Archer avern,
in Wood treet, Westminster"

"Westminster again" exclaimed etherwick.  "hat seems to be the
centre point"

"And a very good thing to have a centrepoint, r. etherwick," said
atherfield.  "When things begin to narrow down, one gets some chance.
Well, I was sayingthis man rang me up to say that if Id go down
there he thought he could give me some information relative to the bill
about the missing man.  What hed got to say, he said, was too long for
a telephone talk.  I answered that Id be with him shortly, and I was
ust setting off when you arrived.  Of course, I dont know what he can
tellit may be nothing, it may be something.  erhaps you gentlemen
would like to go with me and hear what it is"

"I would, but I mustnt," replied enteney.  "I must go to my office
and hear if ady iversreade or the local police have had any fresh
news.  eep in touch with me, though, atherfieldlet me know what you
hear."

"Ill go with you," said etherwick.  "Westminster" he muttered again,
when enteney had gone.  "It looks as if this man Ambrose was known in
that district."

"ikely" assented atherfield.  "But you know, r. etherwick, there
are some queer spots in that quarter  eople who know the purely
ornamental parts of Westminster, such as the Abbey, and the ouses of
arliament, and ictoria treet, and so on, dont know that there are
some fine old slums behind em  But Ill show you when we get down
there.  We shall go through one or two savoury slices."

e was putting on his overcoat as he spoke, in readiness for setting
out, but before he had buttoned it a constable entered with a card.

"Wants to see you particularly, and at once," he said.  "Waiting
outside."

"Bring him instraight" answered atherfield.  e pushed the card
along his desk in etherwicks direction.  "ord orradale" he
exclaimed.  "Whos he"

"he man whos engaged to adame istorelle," replied etherwick, in an
undertone.  "ampshire magnate."

atherfield turned expectantly to the open door.  A shortish, stoutish
person, who looked more like a typical ity man, prosperous and
satisfied, came hustling in and gave etherwick and his companion a
sharp, inquiring glance which finally settled on atherfield.

"r. atherfield" he asked.  "ust so  Im ord orradaleoh, of
course, I sent in my cardust so  Well, r. atherfield, Ive had an
extraordinary communication from ady iversreade.  he telephoned to
my house in ill treet this morning, but I was down in the ity, and
didnt hear of her message till late this afternoon.  he says her
sister, adame istorelle, has been kidnapped
idnappedpreposterous"

"Im afraid its neither preposterous nor improbable, my lord,"
answered atherfield.  "Im quite sure adame istorelle has been
kidnapped, and ady iversreades secretary, iss eatherstone, with
her.  Ive been down at iversreade ourt most of the day, and theres
no doubt about itthe two ladies were carried off from there by three
men in a fast car, which was driven towards ondon.  hats a fact"

"od bless my soul" exclaimed ord orradale.  "In broad daylight
wentieth century, too  And is there no clue"

"one so far, my lord.  Of course, weve noised the affair as much as
possible, and all our people are on the look out.  But its a difficult
case," continued atherfield.  "he probability is that the ladies have
been rushed to some house in ondon and that theyre there in
captivity.  Of course, one theory is that the kidnappers took adame
istorelle for her sister.  hey meant to get ady iversreade and hold
her to ransom."

ord orradale pursed his lips.  hen he rubbed his chin.  hen he
shook his head.  inally he gave etherwick a shrewd glance, eyeing him
from head to foot.

"m" he said.  "Ah  his gentleman  ot one of your people, I think,
atherfield"

"o, my lord.  his gentleman is r. etherwick, of the iddle emple,
who is interested very deeply in certain matters connected with the
affair.  r. etherwick has been down to iversreade with me, and your
lordship can speak freely before him."

ord orradale gave etherwick a friendly, knowing nod.  hen he
glanced at the door, and atherfield made haste to close it.

"hank ee," said ord orradale.  "ust as well to be in private.
mI think Id better tell you something, atherfield.  I dare say
thats a reasonable supposition of yoursthat these villains took
adame istorelle for her sister.  But I dont think they did.  I think
they knew very well whom they were seizing.  ind youtheyd have
seized ady iversreade too if shed happened to be there.  But it was
madame they were after"

"If your lordship would explain" suggested atherfield.

"Im going toits what I come here for  I think I can ust put you
on the right scent.  ou may have heard that adame istorelle and I
are about to marry  ery well, I accordingly knew a good deal about
her affairs.  ow, I dont know whether you know or not that adame
istorelle is actively concernedor has beenin buying and selling
ewels on commission  hats her speciality."

"eard something of it, my lord," replied atherfield.

"ery well.  ow, quite recently adame istorelle bought up in aris a
magnificent set of stones which had been at one time the property of a
member of the ussian Imperial family.  he brought them here to
ondon, meaning, shortly, either to send or take them personally to
America to her customer.  his deal, unfortunately, got into the
papers.  ow, its my belief that these fellows have kidnapped madame
in order to get hold of these ewels.  o you see"

"Ah" exclaimed atherfield.  "I see, my lord  hat puts a new aspect
on the case.  Butsurely adame istorelle wouldnt have the stones on
her"

ord orradale winkeddeliberatelyat both his hearers.

"o" he said.  "oshe wouldnt.  But the scoundrels would figure on
thisthat when she was fairly in their power they would be in a
position to make her give them upto force her, in short, to disclose
their whereabouts.  If theyre desperate villains, not likely to stick
at anything, I think theyll have forced madame to complianceand in
doing so give you a chance to lay hands on them"

"ow, my lord" asked atherfield eagerly.

ord orradale gave the two men a confidential glance.

"his way," he replied.  "he ewels were deposited, for safety, by
adame istorelle at the Imperial afe eposit.  he rents a safe
there.  ow, dont you see what Im suggesting  hese men may force
her to give them the necessary key and a signed order to the safe
people to let the bearer open madames safe and take away a certain
case in which the ewels are packed.  hats what I think will be done.
And what you ought to do is to see the Imperial afe eposit officials
at once, warn them of what I suggest may happen, and take your own
means of watching for such a messenger arriving, and for tracking him
when he departs.  h"

"Or arresting him there and then," said atherfield.

"o, I shouldnt" declared ord orradale.  "Im not a policeman, you
know, but I can give a hint to one.  Instead of arresting the manwho,
you must remember, will be sure to have madames written authority on
himthat is if things turn out as I suggestI should carefully follow
him.  orhell probably go back to where madame and the young lady,
iss Whatshername, are detained  h"

atherfield shook his head.

"I should doubt that, my lord" he answered.  "If things work out as
you suggest,and its a highly probable theorythats about the last
thing he would do  Once the ewels were in his possession"

"ou forget this," interrupted ord orradale.  "hey may use a
catspaw  h"

"Well, theres that in it, certainly," assented atherfield.  "owever,
Ill see that the Imperial afe eposit people are warned and that this
entrance is carefully watched tomorrow morning.  Butthe thing may
have been done already  heres been plenty of time since the ladies
were carried off."

"o" said ord orradale.  "othings happened so far.  I called in at
the Imperial afe eposit as I came here they had neither seen adame
istorelle nor had any communication from her today.  And now the
place is closed for the night."

"id you warn them, then" inquired atherfield.

"I didnt.  I thought it best to see you first," replied ord
orradale.  "he warning and the rest of it will come best from you."

"ery good, my lord.  uch obliged to your lordship for looking in,"
said atherfield.  "Well keep you posted up in anything that
happensat ill treet.  ow," he continued, when ord orradale had
left the office, "well get along to Westminster, r. etherwick, to
the reen Archer and its landlord, illiner."

he "reen Archer" proved to be a respectable tavern which boasted a
saloon bar.  Behind the glass screens of this they found a middleaged,
sharpeyed man, who at the sight of his visitors immediately opened the
door of a parlour in the rear and ushered them into privacy.  e
pointed silently to a copy of the bill asking for news of Ambrose.

"Aye" said atherfield.  "ust so.  I had your message.  ou think you
know this man"

"rom this description of him in that bill, yes," replied the landlord.
"I think hes a mangentleman, by all appearanceswho used to come
into my saloon bar pretty regularly during this last six months.  ince
the end of last summer, I should say, up to about three weeks or so
ago."

"ot since then, eh" asked atherfield.  "hree weeks"

"About that.  ohe hasnt been in for quite that.  But up to then
hed been in, well, four or five days a week.  andsome, fine manin
fact, youve described him exactly there.  I never knew who he
wasused to pass the time o day with him, you know, but that was all.
e always came in about the same timeone to onethirty.  ed have
sometimes a glass of bitter ale and a sandwich or two sometimes a
whisky and soda and two or three biscuits.  tood and had his snack and
went away.  ever talked much.  I took him for some gentleman that had
business hereabouts, and ust wanted a bite and a sup in the middle of
the day, and turned in here for it.  But I dont know what business he
could be concerned in round here.  e hadnt the tradesmans look on
him, you understand.  I should have said he was a professional man of
some sort.  Always very well dressed, you knowsmart.  owever, I did
notice one peculiar thing about him."

"What now" asked atherfield.  "It all helps"

"Well," said the landlord, "I noticed that his hands and fingers were
stainedall sorts of colours.  ometimes it was more noticeable than
at others.  But there it was."

"m" remarked atherfield.  e exchanged a knowing glance with
etherwick.  And when, a few minutes later, they left the tavern, he
turned to him with an air of assurance.  "Im beginning to feel the
end" he said.  "eel it, if I dont see it.  tained fingers, eh
Weve heard of them before, r. etherwick.  And Ill tell ye what it
is.  omewhere about this very spot theres some place where men are
dabblingsecretly, I should thinkwith chemicals, and Ambrose is one
of em, and perhaps Baseverie another, and it was there that annaford
and that man rannet had been that night, and where they were
poisonedand there, too, no doubt, these two ladies are at this
minute  Wellcome to my place first thing in the morning."

etherwick, at a loss what to do further that night, went away and
dined, and, that done, strolled home to his chambers.  here was a
light in his parlour, and when he opened the door he found apperley,
evidently awaiting him, and with apperley a curlyheaded, bignosed,
beadyeyed young ew.




A I

 O I WII

etherwick realised at once that apperley had news, and was waiting
there to communicate it.  But he looked not so much at apperley as at
apperleys companion.  apperley, as etherwick had remarked to more
than one person in the course of those proceedings, concealed his
sharpness under an unusually commonplace exterior he looked, as a
rule, like a young man whose ideas rarely soared above a low level.
But the ew was of a different aspectetherwick was not quite sure
whether he was rat or ferret.  here was subtlety and craft written all
over him, from his bright beady eyes to his long, thin, dirty fingers,
and before apperley spoke his employer felt sure that in this son of
Israel the clerk had found a valuable associate.

"ullo, apperley" exclaimed etherwick.  "Waiting for me  ouve
some news, I suppose"

apperley, grave and formal, pointed a finger at the ew.

"r. Isidore oldmark, sir," he said.  "riend of mine.  I got him to
give me a bit of assistance in this Baseverie and ivian affair.  he
fact is, sir, he knows iviansdont you, Issy"

"home" replied r. oldmark, with a grin.

"And he knows Baseverie, too," continued apperley.  "By sight, anyhow.
o I got himfor a considerationto watch for Baseveries next
appearance on that scene, and then, when he did come, to keep an eye on
himtrick him, in fact.  And Issys seen him tonight, r. etherwick,
and followed him.  hen Issy came to me, and I brought him here."

"ood" said etherwick.  "it down, both of you, and Ill hear about
it."  e dropped into his own easy chair and again regarding the ew
decided that he was probably a creditable witness.  "What do you do at
ivians" he asked.  "mployed there"

r. oldmark glanced at apperley and smiled knowingly.  apperley
nodded.

"All confidential, Issy," he said reassuringly.  "oing no further."

"Of course this is all confidentialand secret," remarked etherwick.
"I only want to know the precise connection between ivians and r.
oldmark."

"Itth a thort of themiofficial, mithter," answered the ew.  "he
fact ith, I do a bit o commithon work for ivianth cuthtomerth, turf
you know.  hoIm in and out of an evening.  hee"

"I see," said etherwick.  "All right  And you know Baseverie"

"Ath well ath I know my own nothe," replied r. oldmark.

"ow long have you known him"

"home time."

"o you know what he is"

"Aint an idea, mithterand noboody elthe that I knowth of  ivth on
hith witth, I should thay, if you athk me.  Wrong un"

"or where he lives"

"o, mithter  All I knowth ith that he cometh to ivianthnow and
then."

"And you saw him tonight"

"I did, mithtertonight ath ever wath"

"What time was that"

"About eight oclock, mithternear ath I can fix it."

"Well, what happened"

"hith, mithter.  e came in about eight, ath I thay.  I wath there,
doing a bit o bithneth with another cuthmur.  Batheverie, he didnt
thtop.  e wathnt in the plathe three minuteth, and while he wath in
he theemedto meto be a bit fidgetythuthpithious, like.  ooked
round and aboutcautiouth.  hen he wentand I followed him.
According to inthructionth from apperley there."

"Where did he go"

"Well, mithter, Ill give you the particularthin full when I theth
out on a ob o that thort I do it proper.  e turned out o
andlethtick athage into the ane, and he had a drink at a bar there.
hen he went to rafalgar quare ube.  I wath clothe behind him when
he booked"

"A moment.  oes he know you"

"ay utht know me by thite, mithter, but not enough to exthite any
thuthpithion in hith mind if he thaw me there behind him.  I never had
no truck with himnever thpoke to him."

"Well, go on.  Where did he book to"

"Warwick Avenue, mithter.  ho did Iof courth.  When we got there, I
followed him outat a thafe dithtance.  e turned down to the anal,
crothed the bridge, and went down to hant aryth anthionth.  And
there he went in."

etherwick glanced at apperley.  apperley permitted himself to wink
at his employerrespectfully, but knowingly.

"Went into t. arys ansions, eh" said etherwick.  "Walked straight
in"

"traight in, mithterfront entranth.  I thee him, from acroth the
road, talking to the man in liveryporter or whatever he hith.  I
could thee through the glath doorth.  hen I thee both of em go up in
the lift.  ho I waited about a bit, utht to thee if hed come out.
e did."

"oon" asked etherwick.

"e wath inthide about ten minuteth.  hen he came out.  Alone.  hith
time he went in tother direction.  I followed him acroth addington
reen to dgware oad ube, and therewell, to tell you the truth,
mithter, there I lotht him  here wath a lot o people about, and I
made thure hed be going thouth.  But he mutht ha gone wetht.  Anyway,
I lotht him altogether."

"WellI think you saw enough to be of help," said etherwick.
"owust keep this to yourself, oldmark."  e motioned apperley
into another room, gave him money for his assistant, and waited until
the ew had gone, shown out by the clerk.  "leven oclock" he
remarked, glancing at his watch as apperley came back.  "apperley
were going outto t. arys ansions.  And after weve been there,
and made a call, youd better come back here with me and take a
shakedown for the nightI shall want you in the morning, unless Im
mistaken."

It was one of apperleys chief virtues that he was always ready to go
anywhere and do anything, and he at once accompanied etherwick to the
top of iddle emple ane, found a taxicab within five minutes, and
proposed himself to sit up and shakedown that night and the next, if
necessary.

"cents getting hot, I think, sir," he remarked as they drove off,
after bidding the driver carry them to addington reen.  "hings seem
to be coming to a head."

"esbut I dont think you know everything," answered etherwick.  e
proceeded to give the clerk an epitomised account of the days doings
as they had related to himself, concluding with atherfields theory as
expressed after leaving the reen Archer.  "oure a smart chap,
apperley," he added.  "What do you think"

"I see atherfields point," answered apperley.  "I can follow his
line.  e thinks like this annaford, when he came to ondon, wanted
to get rid, advantageously, of that formula of his about a new ink.  e
got into touch with Ambrose, whom, of course, hed known before at
ellithwaite.  Ambrose introduced him to some men who deal or dabble in
chemicals, of whom one, no doubt, is Baseverie, and who seem to have a
laboratory or something of that sort somewhere in the Westminster
district.  On the night of the murder Ambrose met annaford, by
appointment, at ictoria, and took him there.  robably, annaford left
the sealed packetopened by that timewith these fellows.  robably,
too, while there he told themokingly, very likelywhat hed
discovered, from the picture in the papers, about the identity of rs.
Whittingham and adame istorelle.  And now comes inranett"

etherwick gave an exclamation that denoted two or three
thingssurprise, for one.

"Ah" he said.  "ranett  o be sure  Id forgotten ranett"

"I hadnt," remarked apperley with a cynical laugh.  "ranettand his
murderis an essential factor.  What I think is this We know that
annaford met Ambrose at ictoria tation that allimportant evening.
Ambrose, without doubt, took him to the place I hinted at ust nowthe
exact location of which is a mystery.  I think annaford stopped there
until late in the evening.  ButI also think he went back again
Withranett"

"Ah" exclaimed etherwick.  "I see"

"We know," continued apperley, "that ranett went that evening to see
the chemist who gave information about him we know, too, that he and
the chemist went and had a drink together, and parted at about closing
time, ranett then, according to the chemist, going towards ictoria
treet.  ow I think that ranett then met annafordaccidentally.
heyd known each other in ellithwaite.  hey talkedranett told
annaford he was down on his luck.  annaford, evidently, was a
kindhearted man, and I think he did two things out of kindness for
ranett.  e gave him that fivepound note"

"hat was got at ivians" interrupted etherwick quickly.

"o be sure" assented apperley.  "But we know that annaford had been
at ivianswith Baseverieundoubtedly.  aken there by Baseverie,
which makes me certain that for two or three days before his death hed
been in touch with both Baseverie and Ambrose.  annaford got that
fiver in change at ivians.  And he gave it to ranett, on hearing his
story.  But he did something elsesomething that was far more
importantthat is far more importantto us"

"What" asked etherwick.

"e turned back to the place hed ust left, and took ranett with
him" answered apperley with confidence.  "e knew ranett was a
trained and qualified chemist he thought he could get him a ob with
these men who, presumably, were going to take up his own invention.  It
would be little more than halfpast ten then.  Where else than at this
place are annaford and ranett likely to have been between that time
and the time at which they got into your carriage at t. amess ark
Of course they were therewith Ambrose and Baseverie."

"As you put ithighly probable," said etherwick.  "wo and a half
hoursdoing what"

"Ah, now we come to the real thing" exclaimed apperley.  "y own
belief is that annaford was fatally poisoned when he left those two
men the first time  heyd two obects in poisoning himor, to put it
another way, hed entrusted them with two secretsone about adame
istorelle the other about his invention.  hey wanted to keep both to
themselves and to profit by both.  he invention, no doubt, has
considerable valueannaford believed it had, anyway.  hey thought
they could blackmail adame and her sister, ady iversreade.  o,
before annaford left them the first time, they poisoned himcleverly,
subtly, devilishlyknowing that so many hours would elapse before the
poison worked, and that by that time hed be safe in bed at his hotel
and would die in his sleep.  Buthe went back to them again, and took
another man with him  othat man had to die, too"

etherwick thought awhile in silence.

"All very good theory, apperley," he said at last.  "Butit may be
nothing but theory.  Why did ranett run off at haring ross"

"Because ranett knew that Ambrose lived in ohn treet, close by,"
replied apperley with promptitude.  "e may have known it before he
may not have known it until that evening.  Buthe knew it  ost
likely he thought that Ambrose had returned home from the place in
Westminster Ambrose may have left there before annaford and ranett
did.  Anyway, we may be reasonably certain that when ranett left you
with the dying or dead man, he ran off to Ambroses flata few minutes
away."

"Why didnt he come back" demanded etherwick.  "Im only wanting to
get at probabilities."

"Ive thought of that, too," replied apperley.  "I think he found
Ambrose out.  But by that time hed had time to reflect.  e knew
something was wrong.  e knew that if he went back, hed find the
police there, and would be questioned.  e might be suspected.  And
sohe went home, with the bottle in which Ambrose had given him a drop
of whisky for himself.  Anddied in his sleep, as they thought
annaford would."

"Why should Ambrose have that bottle down at Westminster" asked
etherwick.

"Why shouldnt he" retorted apperley.  "A man whos taking a tonic
takes it at least three times a dayregularly.  ed have his bottle
with him.  robably there are several similar empty bottles there at
that place."

"Where is that place" exclaimed etherwick.  "Where"

"ot to be found," said apperley, as the cab came to a stand.
"Butheres this"

etherwick led his companion across addington reen and to the house
from which he and atherfield had watched the flats opposite.  ate as
it was, the lodginghouse keeper was up, and lent a willing ear to
etherwicks request that he should go with him to his friend the
caretaker of the ansions.  hat functionary was at supper.  e
continued to sup as etherwick, morally supported by the lodginghouse
man, explained matters to him, but at last he allowed his cheek to
bulge with unswallowed food and turned a surprised and knowing eye on
his principal visitor.

"Blamed if I didnt wonder whether it was all O.. with that chap" he
exclaimed, banging the table with the haft of his knife.  "or all he
was quite the gentleman, I somehow suspicioned him  And yet, hed a
straight tale to tell come here on adames behalf, to get something
for her out of her rooms, had her keys, and give me a note from her
saying as how I was to allow the bearer to go up to her flat  What
more could I expectand what could I dounder the circs  I asks yer"

"Oh, he had a note, had he" inquired etherwick.  "In adames
writing"

he caretaker laid down his knife, and thrusting his hand in his
breastpocket, drew forth an envelope and silently handed it over.  It
was an azuretinted envelope, of a very good quality of paper, such as
is only sold in highclass stationery shops, and the sheet inside
matched it in tint and quality.  But etherwick at once noticed
something about that sheet so, too, did apperley, peering at it from
behind his elbow.  About an inch and a half had been rather roughly cut
off at the top obviously some address had been engraved, or embossed,
or printed on the missing portion.  As for what was written on the
sheet, it was littlea simple order that the caretaker should allow
bearer to go into adame istorelles flat.

"ou recognised that as adames handwriting" suggested etherwick.

"Oh, thats her fist, right enough, that is" replied the caretaker.
"I knew it at once.  And no wonder  I aint no scholard, not mebut
I knows enough to know that it ud puzzle one o them here forgers as
ye reads about to imitate that there sort o writingmore like as if
it had been done with a wooden skewer than a hristian pen  Oh, thats
hers."

etherwick handed the letter and envelope to apperley, who was holding
out a hand.

"Well," he said.  "I wish yed ust let me have a look into adames
flat.  heres something seriously wrong, and"

"Oh, you can do thatlong as Im with you," said the caretaker
readily.  e rose and led the way to the left, and presently ushered
them into a smart flat and turned on the electric light.  "ont see
nothing wrong here," he observed.  "he chap wasnt here ten minutes,
and he carried nothing heavy away, whatever he had in his pockets."

etherwick and apperley looked round.  verything seemed correct and
in orderthe surroundings were those of a refined and artistic woman,
obviously one who loved order and system.  But on a desk that stood in
the centre of the sittingroom a drawer had been pulled open, and in
front of it lay scattered a few sheets of adame istorelles private
notepaper, with her engraved address and crest.  ear by lay some
envelopes, similarly marked.  And with a sudden idea in his mind,
etherwick picked up a sheet or two of the paper and a couple of
envelopes and put them in his pocket.

A few minutes later, once more in the cab which they had kept waiting,
and on the way to ill treet, whither etherwick had bidden the driver
go next, apperley turned to his employer with a sly laugh, and held up
something in the light of a street lamp by which they were passing.

"Whats that" asked etherwick.

"he order written by adame istorelle," answered apperley,
chuckling.  "he caretaker didnt notice that I carried it off,
envelope and all, under his very eyes  But I didand here it is"

"What do you want to do with it" demanded etherwick.  "Whats your
notion"

But apperley only chuckled again and without giving any answer
restored the azuretinted envelope and its contents to his pocket.




A II

 IAB OIIO

ord orradale, who kept up honest, countrysquire habits even in
ondon, had gone to bed when etherwick and apperley arrived at his
house, but he lost little time in making an appearance, in pyamas and
dressinggown, and listened eagerly to etherwicks account of the
recent transactions.

"orce" he muttered, nodding his head at each point of the story.
"orce got it out of her by force.  hat is, if the orders genuine."

apperley produced the sheet of paper, which he had filched under the
caretakers eyes, and silently handed it over.

"Oh, thats adame istorelles handwriting" exclaimed ord orradale.
"ers, without doubt.  ifficult to imitate, of course.  Oh, yeshers
Well, that proves what Ive ust said, r. etherwickforce  hes in
their powerwith the young lady, ississeatherstone, to be
sureand theyve made her write that.  ext, theyll make her write an
order on the Imperial afe eposit.  We must be beforehand with them
there.  arlyearly as possible in the morning.  eet me at
atherfieldsI think hes pretty keen.  Bless me what a pack of
villains  ow I wonder where, in all ondon, these unfortunate ladies
are"

"hats precisely what all this ought to help us to find out," remarked
etherwick.  "Im not so much concerned about the valuables these men
are after as about the safety of"

ord orradale gave him a quick, understanding glance.

"Of iss eatherstone, eh" he said.  "I seeI see  And Im
concerned, too, about adame istorelle.  Well, this, as you say, ought
to help.  But look herewe must be cautiousvery cautious  We
mustnt let atherfieldyou know what the police arewe mustnt let
him be too precipitate.  robablyif a man comes to the safe place,
hell go away from it to where these scoundrels are.  We must
followfollow"

"I agree," said etherwick.

"ine oclock, then, at atherfields," concluded his lordship.  "And
may we have a strong scent, a rousing one, and a successful kill"

With this bit of sporting phraseology in their ears, etherwick and
apperley returned to the iddle emple and retired for the rest of the
night, one to bed, the other to a shakedown on the sittingroom sofa.
But when etherwicks alarum clock awoke him at seventhirty and he put
his head into the next room to rouse the clerk, he found that apperley
had vanished.  he cushions, rugs, and blankets with which he had made
himself comfortable for the night were all neatly folded and
arrangedon the topmost was pinned a sheet of briefpaper, with a
message scrawled in blue pencil.


ou wont want me this morning off on an important notion of my own.
ook out for message from me about noon.

.


uttering to himself that he hadnt the least idea as to what his clerk
was about, etherwick made a hurried toilet, and an equally hurried
breakfast, and hastened away to meet atherfield and ord orradale.
e found these two together, and with them a quiet, solemnfaced
individual, clad in unusually sombre garments, whom atherfield
introduced as etectiveergeant uigman.  atherfield went straight to
business.

"is lordships ust told me of your adventure last night, r.
etherwick," he said, "and Im beginning to get a sort of forecast of
whats likely to happen.  It was, of course, Baseverie who went to
madames flat last nightthats settled.  But what do you suppose he
went for"

"ant say that Ive worked that out," answered etherwick, with a
glance at the others.  "But I imagine that he went there to get, say,
certain keyshaving forced adame istorelle to tell him where they
were.  he keys of her safe at the eposit place, I should think."

"o" replied atherfield, shaking his head knowingly, and with a sly
smile at uigman.  "o, not that.  Ill tell you what he went fora
very simple thing.  e went to get some of adames private notepaper
e knew well enough that if he was to take an order on that afe
eposit to allow the bearer access to adames safe it would have to be
what the rench, I believe, call en rgleeh  Written on her own
notepaper in her own handwriting, and so on.  ee"

"I think youre right, and I think he got it," said etherwick.  "A
drawer in her desk containing boxes of stationery had been pulled out,
and some of its contents lay about the desk.  As a matter of fact,
though I scarcely know why I did it, I put some paper and some
envelopes in my pockethere they are  I had a faint idea that they
might be usefulsomehow."

"Well, thats the notion, depend on it," asserted atherfield, glancing
at the paper which etherwick produced.  "Ive no doubt that somebody,
representing adame istorelle, and bearing an authorization from her,
written on her notepaper in her own writing, will present himself at
the Imperial afe eposit this morning.  Butit wont be Baseverie
And it wont be Ambrose"

"A stranger, eh" suggested etherwick.

"We shall see.  ow," continued atherfield, glancing at the clock,
"well be off to the scene of operations.  his Imperial afe eposit
is in ingswayolborn endand very fortunately situated for our ob,
being close to the ube station therell be lots of people about
there, and we shant attract attention.  And this is the way of ithis
lordship and myself will go into the afe eposit, see the people in
charge, explain matters, and get them to tell us at once if and when
the expected ambassador arrives.  We shall let him"

"Or her," interrupted uigman solemnly.

"ust so, my ladit might be a she," assented atherfield.  "uite
likely  We shall let him or her get what is wanted from the safe and
go away, closely followed by all four of us.  While ord orradale and
I are inside, you and uigman, r. etherwick, will be outside,
talking, casually.  When we come outand youll both keep a sharp
watch on the entrance hallIll give you the office as to the
particular person were following, and wherever that person goes, you
two will go.  But dont come near uswell keep one side of the
street, you the other.  If the person takes to a cab or a buswell,
well have to do the same.  But Ive reasons for thinking he or she
will stick to his feet"

"ow do we goall together" asked etherwick.  "Becauseits a mere
ideahow do you know, atherfield, that these peoplethere would
appear to be more than one concernedarent keeping an eye on you"

"Ive thought of that," answered atherfield.  "owere all going
separately.  Its now ninefifteen.  hat Imperial afe eposit doesnt
open its doors till tennobody can get in there until that time,
anyway.  We all four go out of this office on our own hook.  ach takes
his own method of getting to the top of ingsway.  As soon as I get
there, I go straight in and ask for the manager.  As soon as ord
orradale gets there, he follows suithe and I forgather in the
managers room.  As for you two, go how you likefly, if it suits
youor wander round the side streets.  Butyou meet right opposite
the afe eposit entrance at precisely ten oclock, and under pretence
of casual meeting and conversation keep your eyes on it, noticing
everybody who goes in and comes out.  hat clear  hen we all clear
outone by one."

Outside, and left to his own devices, etherwick walked a little way
and then hailed a taxicab.  e gave his driver a confidential smile.

"ou can ust help me to employ forty minutes," he said, as he got in.
"rive roundanywhere you likeup and downas long as you put me
down at the corner of the olborn estaurant at precisely two minutes
to ten.  ot that"

he driver comprehended, and began a leisurely ourney round certain
principal streets and thoroughfares.  wo minutes before ten he pulled
up at the olborningsway corner and gave his fare a grin.

"one it to the second, sir," he announced, nodding at an adacent
clock.

"ood man" said etherwick, handing out something over the registered
fare.  hen an idea struck him.  "ook here" he continued
confidentially.  "Iand another manmay have to follow somebody from
here, presently.  ust drive down the street here, keep your flag down,
and waitif I want you, I shall be close at hand."

he driver showed his understanding by a nod and a wink and moved a
little distance off to the kerbstone.  etherwick walked slowly down
the west side of ingsway.  And precisely as the clock struck ten he
saw ord orradale come from one direction and enter the
formidablelooking and ust opened door of the afe eposit, and
atherfield appear from the other looking round again he was aware of
the solemnfaced uigman who sauntered round the corner of arker
treet and came towards him.  etherwick went on to meet him.

"here you are" he said, doing a little acting in case any inimical
eyes were on him.  "o the minute  Wed better appear to be doing a
bit of talk, eh  he others have ust gone in."

"I saw em, sir," replied uigman, coming to a halt on the kerb, and
affecting an interest in anything rather than on what he was really
working.  "Ah  But the question iswhen will they come out  ight be
in a few minutesso to speak.  ightnt be for hoursas it were"

"ou seem to be a melancholy chap," observed etherwick.

"elancholy ob" muttered uigman.  "Watching isnt my line.  But
atherfieldhe particularly wanted me to be in at this."

"Why" asked etherwick.

"eculiar knowledge of solicitors and their clerks in this part o
ondon," replied uigman.  "y line.  atherfield, hes an idea that
the order to open this safell be presented by a solicitor."

"ood ordhas he" exclaimed etherwick.  "I wonder  But"

"Big help to these chaps, dont you see, if they can make a solicitor
do the catspaw work," suggested uigman.  "Whod suspect a solicitor
of the igh ourt  And as I know pretty nearly all of emtheres one
I know now coming up tother side of the street," he continued
suddenly.  "hat tallish, thin, palefaced chapsee him  ook at him
without seeming to look.  ow I wonder if hes the party we want"

etherwick looked in the direction indicated.  e saw a youngish,
spectacled man in a silk hat, morning coat, and the corresponding
additions of professional attire, who was walking rapidly along from
outh to north.  e was a very mild, gentlelooking person, not at all
the sort to be concerned in dark plots and mysterious aims, and
etherwick said so.

"Aye, well, you never know" remarked uigman lugubriously.  "But, as I
say, I know him.  r. arrowellr. Octavius arrowellsolicitor, of
t. artins ane, that is.  Been in practice for himself about four
years or so.  ice young fellerquiet.  And he is going in
theresee"

etherwick saw.  here were several people, men and women, entering the
afe eposit ust then, but r. arrowells silk hat and sloping
shoulders made him easily identifiable.

"I dessay its him" observed uigman, with a sigh.  "ust the sort to
be took in, he is  Innocent, unsuspecting sort o gentleman.
oweverit maynt be.  eal o people use these afe eposits
nowadays."

r. arrowell disappeared.  he two watchers waited.  ive, ten,
fifteen, twenty minutes went by then r. arrowell came out.  e came
out ust as any man would come out after transacting his business,
quietly.  obody followed him nobody seemed to be watching himfrom
the afe eposit.  But etherwick noticed at once that whereas he had
entered carrying nothing but an umbrella, he now carried a small,
square, leathercovered box.  With this in his left hand he crossed the
roadway, and advanced straight towards etherwick and uigman.

"o need to move, sir," whispered the detective.  "ake no noticespot
him, though."

r. arrowell, seen at close quarters, looked to be a somewhat
absentminded gentleman.  But, chancing to look up as he stepped on the
pavement, his eyes encountered uigman, who touched his hat.

"orning, r. arrowell," said the detective.  "ice morning, sir."

"orning, uigman," responded r. arrowell.  "A very nice morning"

e nodded smilingly and went on his way, and round the corner into
arker treet.  uigman glanced at etherwick and shook his head.

"ot him" he said.  "atherfields not following.  And, as I said, we
may have to waithours"

But at the end of another ten minutes atherfield and ord orradale
came together out of the entrance hall opposite.  An official, smiling
and talking, accompanied them to the threshold when they left him they
came straight across the road.  And it was obvious to etherwick that
each was in a state of surprisepossibly, of perplexity.  atherfield
hailed them as soon as he was within speaking distance.

"eres a queer business" he said.  "id you see a
professionallooking chap come away ust now who carried a small
leather box"

"We saw r. arrowell, solicitor, t. artins ane," answered uigman.
"I know him.  one down arker treet."

"It was arrowell," assented atherfield.  "I know him, too.  Well," he
turned to etherwick, "its a queer business.  hey knew arrowell
across therehes been to adame istorelles safe for her before.  e
came there ust now, with the usual authorisation, on her notepaper,
went to the safe, got that small box, and went.  arrowella
highlyrespectable legal practitioner"

"Why didnt you stop him and ask him questions" inquired etherwick.

atherfield exchanged a glance with ord orradale.

"ot there" he said.  "Itwell, it looks as if adame really had sent
him  er business."

"Of course shed sent him" exclaimed etherwick.  "ent him under
compulsion  he whole things a clever plant  hese fellows probably
know that shes employed arrowell now and then, and they forced her to
write a letter to him, authorising him to come here again, and
enclosing an order on the afe eposit people  ont you see"

"By ad, theres something in that, atherfield" said ord orradale.
"idnt strike me, though  on my honour, I really thought he had
come direct from her.  ouldnt think why, exactly, but then, as
atherfield says, a highlyrespectable solicitoreh"

"Well soon settle it" exclaimed atherfield suddenly.  "Well go to
arrowells office.  Better discuss it there than have tackled him
here.  Anyway, hell have the square box.  uigman, call a taxi"

"heres a man here waiting for me," said etherwick.  e signalled to
his former driver who quickly came alongside.  "or anything we know,"
he continued, as all four took their seats, and were driven off,
"arrowell may have gone straight away somewhere to hand that box over
We ought to have followed."

"I dont think so," replied atherfield.  "he whole things queer, and
not at all what I expected.  ord orradale says that he never heard of
madame employing arrowell, and yet the afe people say hes been here
two or three times on her business.  But well soon have it out of him."




A III

 AA O I I 

arrowells office proved to be up two flights of stairs in t.
artins ane.  hey were dark and dingy stairs, and none of the four
men clambering up them noticed that an officeboy, rushing
unceremoniously downward carried a small parcel with which he fled out
of the door and away down the street.  hey were, indeed, thinking of
arrowelland within five minutes they were all in his private room.
or another five minutes atherfield was explaining mattersexplaining
to an obviously startled and much astonished listener.

"hats how it stands," concluded atherfield.  "ouve evidently got
the explanation, r. arrowell.  ow"

"But you surprise me" broke in the solicitor.  "Ive acted for adame
istorelle in two or three mattersIve got things from her safe for
her before, once or twice.  And I saw nothing unusual in the letter she
sent me this morning.  ere it is  ou can see it.  er usual
notepapercertainly her handwritingnobody, I think, could imitate
that successfully.  ou see what she saysI was to give the enclosed
authorisation to the afe people, take out a small, square,
brownleathercovered box from the safe, pack it up, and send it off to
r. . Basing, ost Office, outhampton, at once, by express delivery.
othing unusual in all that, I think.  Of course, I carried out her
wishes.  But look at the letter."

All four men were looking at the letter.  It was as arrowell
described, and whether it had been written under duress or not, the
writing was bold and firm.  But atherfield seized on the envelope, and
after a glance at it, pointed to the postmark.

"ee that" he exclaimed.  "osted in the .W. district late last
night.  If madame had been at home in addington the postmark would
have been different.  Wellbut the square box, r. arrowell  ouve
got it, of course  o you know that that box probably contains ewels
worth"

"he box" eaculated arrowell.  "ot it  Of course not  Its gone
he boy went off to the post office with itoh, ust before you came."

"ad" muttered ord orradale.  "Wellthe post office, at once,
atherfield"

But atherfield suddenly laughed, throwing up both hands as if with a
sudden inspiration.

"o, my lord, no" he said.  "o  he box is safe enough in the post.
Its off to r. . Basing, ost Office, outhampton.  And when r.
Basing calls to collect ithell find me"

here was triumphant conviction in atherfields tone there was the
impulse to immediate action in the way in which he pulled out a railway
guide from his pocket, and rapidly turned its pages.  But etherwick
and ord orradale looked at each other.  And each saw that the other
was dubious.

"es," said ord orradale slowly.  "mno doubt, atherfield.  But I
say, you knowthose ewels are worth no end  afe enough, perhaps, in
the hands of the postal authorities, now they are there, buttheres
many a slip, you know, and"

"ou might take the postal authorities into your confidence," suggested
etherwick.  "hese people are up to all sorts of wily tricks"

atherfield laughed quietly.  It was the laugh of a man who knows his
own business thoroughly, and is a little impatient of outside criticism.

"I know what Im doing, gentlemen," he answered.  "eave it to me as to
what I do with the post office people.  Ive as good as got the
handcuffs on Baseverie or on Ambroseperhaps on both  his is how I
figure the thing," he went on, with a final glance at the timetable.
"hese two men have got adame istorelle and the young ladysecretary
in their power, safe somewhere in ondon.  hey forced madame, last
night, to write that letter to r. arrowell herewe know what they
made her write.  r. arrowell got the small box containing the ewels,
and hes sent it off, already, by express delivery, to outhampton.  It
will be there early this evening, and one or other of the men will be
there to meet it.  If Baseverie calls for it, Ambrose will be round the
corner.  If Ambrose calls for it, Baseverie will be close at hand.
robably theyre already in outhamptontheyd go this morning, to be
on the spot.  As soon as the box is in their hands theyll be
offprobably to the ontinent, by outhampton and avre.  hey wont
try the Atlanticthe five days voyage would be too risky.  heyll
make for rance.  But they wont get to rancetheyll find themselves
in the lockup at outhampton before bedtime  ou see if that doesnt
come off, gentlemen, as sure as my names what it is.  ow, uigman,
you come with me.  Weve ust nice time to catch the onethirty, and to
get in touch with the outhampton police, and lay our plans and make
our arrangements.  ome time tonight, gentlemen, youll hear from me"

hen atherfield hurried uigman away, and the three men left behind
looked at each other.  r. arrowell was obviously much concerned, and
his hands, thin and nervous, trembled as he began to arrange the papers
on his desk.

"his is a most distressing business, gentlemen," he said.  "It is very
painful to me to think that I have been made an instrument in a crime
of this sort, however innocent a one  But how could I tell that this
letter was forced out of adame istorelle  On the face of it"

"Oh, theres no blame attaching to you, r. arrowell" interrupted
ord orradale.  "On the face of it, the letters genuine enough.  But
I wanted to ask you a question ow much do you know of adame
istorelle  I mean, how often has she employed you"

"wo or three times only," replied arrowell.  "he came to me first
about an agreement which I had had to send her on behalf of another
client.  he seemed very friendly, and was kind enough to say that next
time she had any legal business she would remember me as she hadnt any
regular solicitor of her own.  I think," he added with a deprecating
smile, "she probably saw that I was beginning, and hadnt much to do."

"I see," said ord orradale, looking round at the somewhat humble
appointments of the office.  "And youve been to that afe eposit
place on her behalfhow often"

"wice.  On each occasion adame istorelle wrote her instructions from
abroad.  Once she was in aris.  he other time she was at ice.  he
instructions were similar on both occasions I was to go to the afe
eposit, get a certain parcel or article and post it to an address
given.  he first time I sent a small parcel to AmsterdamI have the
exact address and name the second, to ew ork.  o that, of course,
when I got adames letter this morning, I saw nothing unusual in it."

"ust so" agreed ord orradale.  "ou wouldnt.  Well, I hope
atherfield will clap the irons on the men who forced her to write it
h, etherwick"

"With all my heart" responded etherwick "But I, too, want to ask r.
arrowell a question.  ow long," he continued, "have you been here, in
t. artins ane"

"Oh, four or five years," replied arrowell.

"hen you know this district pretty well, of course.  ave you ever
come across a man whom Ill try to describe to you"  e went on to
give an accurate, if concise, description of Baseverie.  "hat man," he
concluded, "is sometimes seen around here."

arrowell nodded.

"I know him" he said.  "In fact, hes been in this very roomto see
me.  But I dont know his name, nor anything much about him.  e was
brought here by another man and he only stayed a few minutes."

"ow much do you know about himhowever little" asked etherwick.

"his much.  ou know that people who have invented things come to
solicitors for legal advice, and sometimes to get information as to how
they can best dispose of their inventions  Well, about nine months ago
a man came to me who claimed to have invented a dropbottlethat is, a
bottle from which you could only drop one drop of stuff at a time.  e
said such a thing was badly wanted, and that there ought to be a pile
of money in it.  e wanted to know how best to get it on the market.  I
didnt know, but I mentioned the matter to one or two people, and a man
I knowor knew at that time, for hes since dead, unfortunatelysaid
that he knew a man who was a sort of commission agent for
inventionstook up a good idea, dont you see, and introduced itand
he promised to bring him to see me.  e brought him the man he brought
was, without doubt, the man you describe.  is name was not mentioned,
but I am sure he was that man.  I dont know what your man is, but I
felt sure that the man I am talking about either was or had been a
medical man."

"Ah" exclaimed etherwick.  "What made you think that"

"rom his conversationfrom the remarks he made about the bottle.  e
didnt take it up he said my client was too late and was wrongly
informed into the bargain there was such a thing, and a superior one,
already on the market.  e went away then, and, as I say, I never heard
his name, and Ive never seen him since."

"hats the man we want" said etherwick.  "If atherfield can only
lay hands on him  But we shall know more by midnight."

Outside, he turned to ord orradale with a shake of the head.

"Were no nearer to any knowledge of where the two women are" he
exclaimed.

"Oh, I dont know" responded ord orradale.  "I think we are, you
know.  ou see, if atherfield nabs those chaps, or even one of them,
he or they will see that the games up, and will give in and say where
their captives are.  Odd business, etherwick, that people can be
kidnapped and imprisoned in broad daylight in ondon"

"I dont think anythings impossible or oddin ondon," answered
etherwick dryly.  "If one had only the least idea as to which quarter
of the town that car was driven, one might be doing something"

"ots of subsections in every quarter, and subsections again in each
of those," replied ord orradale with equal dryness.  "ake some time
to comb out this town  o  I think we must trust to atherfield.
othing else to trust to, in fact."

But etherwick suddenly thought of apperley.  e began to wonder what
the clerk was after, what his notion had been.  hen he remembered
apperleys admonition to look out for a message about that time, and
excusing himself from ord orradale, he umped on a bus and went along
to the emple.  here, in the letterbox, he found a telegram

  "eet me ictoria three oclock.  apperley."


etherwick set off for ictoria there and then.  But it was only a
quarterpast two when he got there, and as he had had no lunch, he
turned into the restaurant.  here, when he was halfway through a
chop, apperley found him, and slipped into a chair close by before
etherwick noticed his presence.

"hought I might find you in here, sir," said apperley.  hey were
alone in a quiet corner, but the clerk lowered his voice to a whisper.
"Well," he continued, bending across the table, "Ive done a bit,
anyhow."

"In what way" asked etherwick.

apperley produced from his breast pocket some papers, and from amongst
them selected an envelopethe azuretinted envelope which he had
picked up from the caretakers supper table at t. arys ansions.

"ou recognise this" he said, with a sly smile.  "ou know where I got
it.  his is the envelope which Baseverie took to the caretaker, with
the order to enter adame istorelles flat.  ou knew that I carried
it off, from under the mans nose, last night.  But you didnt know
why.  I only laughed when you asked me."

"Well, why, then" inquired etherwick.

"his reason," replied apperley.  "We both noticed that the sheet of
paper on which the order had been written by adame had been
shortenedthere was no doubt that a printed or embossed address had
been trimmed off, rather roughly, too.  We noticed that, I say, both of
us.  But I dont think you noticed something far more importantfar,
far more importantfor our purposes."

"o," admitted etherwick.  "I didnt.  What"

"his," said apperley, turning back the broken flap of the envelope.
"ou didnt notice that here, on the envelope, is the name and address
of the stationer who supplied this stuff  here you areW. . alkin,
, Broadway, Westminster.  ou never saw that, r. etherwick.  But I
did"

etherwick began to comprehend.  e smiledgratefully.

"mart of you, apperley" he exclaimed.  "I see  Andyouve been
there"

"Ive been there," answered apperley.  "I saw a chance of tracking
these men down.  I couldnt get hold of alkin till nearly noon, but I
got on like a house afire when I did get him.  ou see," he went on,
"that paper is, to start with, of an unusual tint, in colour.
econdly, its of very superior quality, though very thinintended
chiefly for foreign correspondence.  hirdly, its expensive.  ow, I
felt certain its use would be limited, and what I wanted to find out
from the stationer wasto whom hed supplied it.  hat was easy.  e
recognised the paper and envelope at once.  Of the handwriting on the
paper, he knew nothing whateveradames writing, you knowthat hed
never seen before.  But he said at once that hed only supplied that
particular make of paper and envelopes to three people, and for each
person hed prepared a die, to emboss the addresses.  he embossing had
been done at his shop, and he showed me specimens of each.  One was for
the owager ady arkentree, , rosvenor ardens.  hat was no use.
he second was for iss helandry, , bury treet.  hat was out of
count, too.  But the third was what I wanted.  It was ust the address,
, ittle mith treet, .W..  As soon as I saw it, I knew Id got on
the right track."

"o on" said etherwick.

"he stationer, alkin, didnt know the name of the man who ordered
this paper and gave this address," continued apperley.  "e knew him
well enough as a customer, though, and described him.  Baseverie,
without a doubt  alkin says that Baseverie, during the last few
months, bought various items of stationery from himnotebooks,
duplicating paper, office requisites, and so on.  e never knew his
name, but as he always carried away his own purchases, and paid spot
cash for them, that didnt matter.  alkin supplied him with ten quires
of this paper and envelopes to match, a couple of months ago.
othere you are  And there I wassure at last that Baseveries
mysterious hidingplace was , ittle mith treet"

"oodgood" said etherwick.  "What next"

"Well, I thought we could do with a bit of help," replied apperley,
smiling.  "o I left alkinbound to secrecy, of courseand
telephoned to Issy oldmark.  Issy is ust the sort of chap for games
of this sort  Issy cameand he and I took a stroll round.  o you
know ittle mith treet"

"ot I" answered etherwick.  "ever heard of it"

"Oh, well, but it is a street," said apperley.  "It lies between reat
mith treet and ufton treet, back o the hurch ousenot so far
from the Abbey.  Bit slummy down those quarters, round aboutsort of
district thats seen decidedly better days.  till, theres good, solid
houses here and there is one of em.  rom outside, it looks the
sort of house you cant get intodark, silent, heavilycurtained
windowssort of place in which you could murder anybody on the quiet.
ery substantial front door, painted dark green, with an oldfashioned
brass knockerthat sort of house.  We took a good look at it."

"ee anything" asked etherwick.

"othing but what Ive told youlifeless sort o place," answered
apperley.  "owever, having once seen it, I wasnt going to leave it
unwatched, so I posted Issy there, in the window of a convenient
publichouse, and came away to telegraph to you.  And there Issy
iseither in his pub, or loafing round.  And now we ought to go and
hear if hes anything to report.  And if he hasntwhat then"

"ust so," said etherwick.  "hats itwhat then  But before we do
anything at all, apperley, Id better post you up as to whats
happened elsewhere this morning.  ou see," he continued, when he had
finished his story, "if atherfields theory is correct, and Baseverie
has already gone to outhampton to collect that parcel on its arrival,
and if Ambrose has gone with him, we shant find Baseverie at this
address.  Butwe might inquire if hes known there."

apperley reflected a while.  hen an idea seemed to suggest itself.

"ay your bill, sir, and lets get out to a ost Office irectory
somewhere," he said.  "Well get the name of the occupier of , ittle
mith treet."

en minutes later they were looking down the long columns of names in a
directory apperley suddenly pointed to what they wanted.

"here we are" he said.  "rs. annah allettboardinghouse
proprietor."

"ome along" said etherwick.  "Well see rs. allett, anyhow."

But on arrival at ittle mith treet, apperley looked round first,
for his friend, r. oldmark.  r. oldmark materialised
suddenlyapparently from nowhereand smiled.

"Afternoon, mithter" he said politely to etherwick.  "ovely weather,
ithnt it  Aint theen nothing, apperley, old bean  Aint been a
thoul in or out o that houth, thinth you hopped it  heemth to me
itth locked up."

"Well see about that," remarked etherwick.  "ome with me, apperley.
ou stay here.  oldmark, and keep your eyes as open as before."

e advanced boldly, with the clerk at his heels, to the door of number
, and knocked loudly on the stout panel, supplementing this with a
ring at the bell.  his dual summons was twice repeatedwith no result.

"omebody coming" whispered apperley, suddenly.  "Boltedinsideas
well as locked"

etherwick distinctly heard the sound of a stout bolt being withdrawn,
then of a key being turned.  he door was openedonly a little, but
sufficiently to show them the face and figure of an unusually big
woman, an Amazon in appearance, hard of eye and lip, who glared at them
suspiciously, and as soon as she saw that there were two of them,
narrowed the space through which she inspected her callers.  But
etherwick got a hand on the door and a foot across the threshold.

"rs. allett" he inquired in a purposely loud voice.  "ust so  Is
octor Baseverie in"

Both men were watching the woman keenly, and they saw that she started
a little, involuntarily.  But her head shook a ready negative.

"obody of that name here" she answered.

he would have shut the door, but for etherwicks foothe advanced it
further, giving rs. allett a keen, searching glance.

"erhaps you know r. Baseverie by another name" he suggested.
"ois r. Basing in"

But the ready shake of the head came again, and the hard eyes grew
harder and more suspicious.

"obody of that name here, either" she said.  "ont know anybody of
those names."

"I think you do," persisted etherwick sternly.  e turned to
apperley, purposely.  "We shall have to get the police"

"ook out, sir" exclaimed apperley, snatching at etherwicks arm.
"our fingers"

he woman suddenly banged the door to, narrowly missing etherwicks
hand, which he had closed on the edge a second later they heard the
bolt slipped and the key turned.  And etherwick, as with a swift
illumination, comprehended things, and turned sharply on his clerk.

"apperley" he exclaimed.  "ure as fate  hose ladies are in there
rapped"

"houldnt wonder, sir," agreed apperley.  "And as you saythe
police"

"ome back to oldmark," said etherwick.

oing lower down the street and retreating into the shelter of a
doorway, the three men held a rapid consultation, suddenly interrupted
by an exclamation from the ew, who still kept his eyes on the house

"help me if the woman aint leavin that houth" he said.  "hee
thethee ith  ockin the door behind her, too  oin up the
thtreet"

etherwick looked and saw, and pushed oldmark out of the doorway.

"ollow" he said.  "And for ods sake, dont miss her"




A I

 O I  A

he ew silently and promptly set out in the wake of the hurrying
woman presently she and her pursuer disappeared round a corner.

"hats the result of our call, apperley" said etherwick.  "hes
gone somewhereto tell somebody"

"ikely" assented apperley.  "But wherever shes gone, Issy
oldmarkll spot her.  es the eyes of a lynx."

"e let Baseverie slip him, the other night, though," remarked
etherwick.

"Well, there was some excuse for that," said apperley, "to begin with,
he was only instructed to find out where Baseverie went, and to end
with he had found out  ell not let this woman slip him.  hes good
to followplenty of her."

"I wish we knew what shed left in that house," said etherwick.
"Well have to find out, somehow"

"hats a police ob," replied apperley.  "ant walk into peoples
houses without a warrant.  And you say atherfields on the other
track  owever, I should say that this womans gone off now to find
somebody whos principally concernedshe looked afraid, in my opinion,
when she saw me."

"hes in it, somehow," muttered etherwick.

"hat house looks mysterious enough for anything.  Well keep a close
watch on it, anyway, until oldmark comes back, however long that may
be."

But the ew was back within twenty minutes.  o was the woman.  he
came first, hurrying up the street quicker than when she had left it.
As far as the watchers could make out from their vantage point, twenty
yards away from her door, she looked flustered, distressed, upset.
After her, on the opposite pavement, came r. Issy oldmark, his hands
in his pockets.

he woman reentered the house they heard the door bang.  A moment
later the ew turned into the entry in which etherwick and apperley
stood, half hidden from the street.  e smiled, inscrutably.

"hee her go back to her houth" he asked.  "Well, I followed.  I thaw
where theeth been, too."

"Where, then" demanded etherwick, impatiently.

oldmark erked his head in the direction from whence he had come.

"ound that corner," he said, "you get into a regular thlum.  ittle
thtreeth, alleyth, pathageth, and tho on.  In one of em, a narrow
plathe, where thereth a thort of openair market, thereth a good
thithed pieth of blank wall, with an ironfathend door in it.  Well,
the woman went in therelet herthelf in with a key that thee took from
her pocket.  Ath thoon ath theed gone in, I took a clother look.  he
doorth fathend with iron, or thteel, ath I thaidolly thtrong.
here aint no name on it, and no keyhole that you can look through.
he wallth a good nine or ten feet high, and itth covered with broken
glath at the top.  ot a nithe plathe to get into, nohow"

"Well" inquired etherwick.  "he went in"

"Went in, ath I thay, mithter, and the door clothed on her.  After Id
taken a glimpth at the door I got a potht behind one of the thtalls in
the thtreet and watched.  he came out again in about ten
minitthlooked to me, too, ath if thee hadnt had a very plethant time
inthide.  pthet  And thee thet off back here, fathter than vhat thee
came.  ow theeth gone into her houth againath you no doubt thaw.
And thatth all.  But if I wath you, mithter," concluded Issy, "I
should utht find out vhat there ith behind that door and the wall
itth thet inI thhould tho"

"hats a police ob," said apperley once more.  "If wed only got
atherfield with us, we could"  etherwick pausedthinking.  "ook
here, apperley," he continued, with a sudden inspiration.  "I know
what well do  ou get a taxicab, as quickly as possible.  rive to
the police station where I usually meet atherfield.  heres another
man there whom I know, and whos pretty well up in this
businessetectiveergeant obmore.  Ask for him.  ell him what
weve discovered, and ask him to come back with you and to bring
another man if he thinks it necessary.  ow then, oldmark  ell
apperley exactly where this place is."

he ew pointed along the street to its first corner.

"ound that corner," he said.  "irtht turning to the right then
firtht to the left then firtht to the rightthatth the thpot.
otth o little thtallth in ita bithy, crowded plathe."

"idnt ye notice the name" demanded apperley, half scoldingly.

"o be thure I did" grinned oldmark.  "encove htreet.  But itth
better to dethcribe it than to name it.  And dont you go tellin no
tackthydriver to drive you in therecauth there aint room"

apperley gave no answer to this piece of advice he shot off in the
direction of ictoria treet, and etherwick turned to the ew.

"Well go and have another look at this place, oldmark," he said.
"But well go separatelyas long as were in this street, anyway.  ou
stroll off to that first corner, and Ill oin you."

e crossed the street when the ew had lounged away, and once more took
a narrow look at the house into which the big woman had vanished.  It
was as close barred and curtained as ever a veritable place of
mystery.  or a moment etherwick doubted whether he ought to leave it
unwatched.  But the descriptions of the wall and door in encove treet
had excited his imagination, and he went on, turned the corner, and
reoined oldmark.  oldmark at once went in front, piloting him into a
maze of unusually dirty and crowded streets, and finally into one,
narrower than the rest, on each side of which were tentlike stalls
whereon all manner of cheap wares were being offered for sale by
raucousvoiced vendors.  e saw at once that this was one of those
openair markets of which there are many in the poorer neighbourhoods
of ondon, and wherein you can buy a sixpenny fryingpan as readily as
a paper of fried fish, and a gay neckerchief alongside a damaged orange.

hreading his way behind Issy, and between the thronged stalls and the
miserable shops that lined the pavement, etherwick presently came to
the piece of blank wall of which the ew had told him.  he houses and
shops round about were old and dilapidated, but the wall was either
modern or had been rebuilt and strengthened.  It stretched between two
low houses, one used as a grocers, the other as a hardware shop.  In
length, it was some thirty feet in height, quite ten its coping, as
oldmark had said, was liberally embattled with broken glass.  he
door, set flush with the adoining masonry, was a solid affair, faced
with metal, newly painted, and the lock was evidently a patent one.  A
significant fact struck etherwick at oncethere was no sign of a bell
and none of a knocker.

"ou say the woman let herself in here" he asked, as he and Issy
paused.

"hatth it, mithter etherwicklet herthelf in," replied Issy.  "I
thee her take the key from her pocket."

etherwick glanced at the top of the wall.

"I wonder whats behind" he muttered.  "Building of some sort, of
course."  e turned to a man whose stall stood ust in front of the
mysterious door, and who at that moment had no trade.  "o you know
anything about this place" he asked.  "o you know whats behind this
wall  What building it is"

he stallkeeper eyed etherwick over, silently and carefully.
eciding that he was an innocent person and not a policeman in plain
clothes, he found his tongue.

"I dont, guvnor" he answered.  "Aint a bloomin notion  I been
comin here, or hereabouts, this three year or more, but I aint never
seen behind that wall, nor in at that there doorway.  elp me"

"But I suppose youve seen people go in and come out of the door"
suggested etherwick.  "It must be used for something"

"I reckon it is, guvnor, but I dont call nobody to mind, though, to
be sure, I see a woman come out of it a while agobig, heavyawed
woman, she was.  But queer as it may seem, I dont call to mind ever
seeing anybody else.  ou see, guvnor, I comes here at about ten
oclock of a morning, and I packs up and ops it at fiveif theres
folks comes in and out o that spot, it must be early in a morning and
late at night, and so I shouldnt see em.  But its my belief this
here wall and door is back premises to somethingthe front o the
placell be on the other side."

"hats a good idea," said etherwick, with a glance at oldmark.
"ets go round."

But there was no going round.  Although they tried various alleys and
passages and streets that ought to have been parallel to encove
treet, they failed to find any place that could be a frontage to the
mysterious wall and its closeset door.  But the ews alert faculties
asserted themselves.

"We can thee vhatth behind that vail, mithter, eathy enough if we get
one o them thopkeeperth oppothit to let uth go upthtairth to hith
firtht floor," he said.  "ook right acroth the thtreet there, thtallth
and all, into vhatever there ith.  ry that one," he went on, pointing
to a greengrocers establishment which faced the closeset door.  "ell
him were doin a bit o land thurveyinwhich ith thtrue"

etherwick made his requestthe greengrocers lady showed him and
oldmark upstairs into a bowwindowed parlour, one of those dismal
apartments which are only used on undays, for the purpose of adding
more gloom to a gloomy day.  he observed that there was a nice view
both ways of the street, but etherwick confined his inspection to the
front.  e saw across the wall easily enough, now.  here was little to
see.  he wall bounded a yard, bounded on its left and right sides by
the walls of the adoining houses, and at its further extremity by a
low, squat building of red brick, erected against the rear of a high,
windowless wall beyond.  rom its mere aspect, it was impossible to
tell what this squat, flatroofed structure was used for.  Its
doorclosedwas visible visible, too, were the windows on either
side.  But it was easy to see that they were obscured, as to their
lower halves, by coats of dark paint.  here was no sign over the
building no outward indication of its purpose.  In the yard, however,
were crates, boxes, and carboys in wicker cases a curiouslyshaped
chimney, proecting from the roof above, suggested the presence of a
furnace or forge beneath.  And etherwick, after another look, felt no
doubt that he was gazing at the place to which annaford had been
taken, and where he had been skilfully poisoned.

oldmark suddenly nudged his arm, and nodded at the crowded street
below.

"apperley" he whispered.  "And two men with him"

etherwick, glancing in the direction indicated, saw obmore and
another man, both in plain clothes, making their way down the street,
between the stalls and the shops.  With them, and in close
conversation, was a uniformed constable.  e turned to leave the room,
but oldmark again touched his elbow.

"Before we go, mithter," he said, "utht take another glanth at that
plathe oppothite, and itths thurroundinth.  I thee where we can get
in  ye thee, mithter etherwick, the wall between that yard and the
next houththe righthand thide oneith fairly low at the far end.
ow, if the man in that houth would let uth go through to hith
backyardvhat"

"I see" agreed etherwick.  "Well try it.  But obmore firstcome
along."

e slipped some silver into the hand of the greengrocers lady, and
went down to the street.  A few brief explanations to the two
detectives supplemented the information already given them by
apperley, and then obmore nodded at the constable who stood by,
eagerly interested.

"Weve been talking to him, r. etherwick," he said.  "es sometimes
on day duty here, and sometimes hes on night.  e says hes often
wondered about this place, and its a very queer thing that though hes
known this district more than a year, hes never seen a soul go in or
out of that door, and hasnt the least notion of what business, if it
is a business, is carried on there"

"ever seen anything or anybody" corroborated the constable.  "At any
timeday or night.  When I first came on this beat, maybe fifteen
months ago, that door had been newly set and painted, and the glass had
ust been stuck atop of the wall.  But its a factIve never seen
anybody go in or come out"

"I propose to go in," said etherwick.  "I think weve abundant cause,
knowing what we do.  It may be that the two missing ladies are there.
Ive been having a look into the yard, and we could get into it easily
by going through the grocers shop there, on the right, and climbing
the wall from his back premises.  What do you say, obmore"

"Oh, I think so" agreed obmore.  "ow were on the ob, well carry
it through.  Better let me tackle the grocer, r. etherwickIll see
him first and then call you in."

he other waited while obmore entered the shop and spoke with its
owner.  hey saw him engaged in conversation for several minutes then
he came to the door and beckoned the rest to approach.

"hats all right," he said in an aside to etherwick.  "We can go
through to his backyard, and hell lend us a stepladder to get over
the wall.  But hes told me a bithe knows the two men who have this
place in the next yard, and theres no doubt at all, from his
description of them, that ones Ambrose and the other Baseverie.  e
says theyve had the place almost eighteen months, and he thinks they
use it as a laboratorychemicals, or something of that sort.  But he
says theyre rarely seensometimes hes never seen them for days and
even weeks together.  sually theyre there of a nighthes seen
lights in the place at all hours of the night.  Wellcome on"

he posse of investigators filed through the dark little shop to a yard
at its rear, the grocers apprentice going in front with a stepladder,
which he planted against the intervening wall at its lowest point.  One
by one, the uniformed constable going first, the six men climbed and
dropped over.  But for their own presence, the place seemed deserted
and lifeless.  As etherwick had observed from the greengrocers
parlour the windows were obscured by thick coats of paint
nevertheless, two or three of the men approached and tried to find
places from which the paint had been scratched, in an effort to see
what lay inside.  But the constable, bolder and more direct, went
straight to the entrance.

"oors open" he exclaimed.  "ot even shut"  e pushed the door
wide, and went into the building, the rest crowding after him.
"ullo" he shouted.  "ullo"

o answer came to the summons.  he constable crossed the lobby in
which they were all standing, and opened an inner door.  And etherwick
saw at once that the grocers surmise as to the purpose to which the
place was put had been correctthis was a chemical laboratory, well
equipped, too, with modern apparatus.  But there was not a sign of life
in it.

"obody here, apparently," murmured one of the men.  "lown"

obmore went forward to another door, and opening it, revealed a room
furnished as an office.  here was a rolltop desk in it, and papers
and documents lying there he and etherwick began to finger and
examine them.  And etherwick suddenly saw something that made a link
between this mysterious place and the house he had called at earlier in
the afternoon.  here, before his eyes, lay some of the azuretinted
notepaper which apperley had traced with the embossed address on it of
which the stationer had told.

"heres no doubt weve hit on the place at last, obmore," he said.
"I wish wed had atherfield here.  But"

Before he could say more, a sudden shout came from oldmark, who, while
the others were investigating the lower regions, had courageously, and
alone, gone up the low staircase to the upper rooms.

"ithter" he called.  "ithter etherwick come up herecome up, all
of you.  ereth a man here, athittin in a chairand thelp me if I
dont believe heth a thtiff undead"




A 

A

he rest of the searchers, hearing that startled cry from the ew, with
one accord made for the upper part of the building.  obmore and
etherwick reached him first he was standing at the halfopened door
of a room, into which he was staring with eager eyes.  hey pushed by
him and entered.

etherwick took in the general aspect and contents of that room at a
glance.  It had been fitted uprecently, he thought, from certain
small evidencesas a bedsittingroom.  A campbed stood in one
corner there was a washstand, a dressing table, a chest of drawers,
two or three pictures, a shelf of books, a small square of carpet in
the centre of the floor, the outer edges of which had been roughly and
newly stained.  On the bed lay, open, a suitcase, already packed with
clothes and linen by it lay an overcoat, hat, gloves, umbrella it was
evident that the man to whom it belonged had completed his preparations
for a departure, and had nothing to do but to close and lock the
suitcase, put on his overcoat and hat, pick up the other things and go
away.

But the man himself  here was a big, oldfashioned easy chair at the
side of the beda roomy, comfortable affair.  A man lay, rather than
sat, in it, in an attitude which suggested that he had dropped there as
with a sudden weariness, laid his head back against the padded cushion,
andgone to sleep.  But the men knew, all of them, as they crowded
into that room, that it was no sleep that they had broken in uponit
was death.  his, as the ew had been quick to see, was a dead
mandead

etherwick took him in as quickly as he had taken in his surroundings.
is head lay quietly against the padding of the chair, a little
inclined to his left shoulder the face was fully visible.  It wasto
etherwickthe face of a stranger in all his and atherfields
investigations it had not been described to them.  et he was certain
that he was looking on the man known to them by repute as Ambrose.
isguised, of coursehe had shaved off the dark beard and moustache of
which they had heard, and he could see at once that the loss of them
had made a remarkable difference in his appearance.  But nothing could
disguise his height and general build.  his, without doubt, was the
man atherfield and he had hunted for, the man who had met annaford at
ictoria, who had disappeared from his flat in the Adelphithe man who
was associated with Baseverie, and who

"ead as a doornail" muttered obmore, bending close to the still
figure.  "Andhes been dead a good bit, toosome hours, anyway.
tiff  o ye know him, r. etherwick"

etherwick said what he thought.  obmore pointed to the things on the
bed.

"ooks as if hed been taken with a seizure ust as he was about to set
off somewhere," he remarked.  "Well, if this is the r. Ambrose weve
been seekingbut lets see if hes got anything on him to prove his
identity."

While the rest of the men stood by watching, he put his hand into the
dead mans inside breast pockethe was wearing a smart, brandnew grey
tweed suit, etherwick, later on, remembered how its newness struck him
as being incongruously out of place, somehowand drew out a
pocketbook.  ouching etherwicks elbow and motioning him to follow
him, he went over to the window, leaving the others still staring
wonderingly at the dead man.

"his is a queer business, r. etherwick," he whispered as they drew
apart.  "ou think this is the r. Ambrose we were after"

"ure of it" answered etherwick.  "es shaved off his beard and
moustache, and thats no doubt made a big difference in his appearance,
but you may depend on it, this is the man  But whats caused his
sudden death"

hen a keen, vivid recollection flashed up in him, and he turned
sharply, glancing at the rigid figure in the background.

"What is it" asked obmore curiously.  "omething strikes you"

etherwick pointed to the dead mans attitude.

"hatsthats ust how annaford looked when he died in the railway
carriage" he whispered.  "After the first signsyou knowhe laid
back anddied.  ust like thatas if hed dropped quietly asleep.
ancan it be that"

"I know what youre thinking," muttered obmore.  "oisoned
Wellwhat aboutehthe other man"

"Baseverie" exclaimed etherwick.

"Why notto rid himself of an accomplice  Butthis pocketbook,"
said obmore.  "ets see whats in it.  oesnt seem to be anything
very much, by the thinness."

rom one flap of the pocketbook he drew out a wad of carefullyfolded
bank notes, and rapidly turned them over.

"undred and fifty pounds there," he remarked.  "And whats this
papera draft on a ew ork bank for two hundred.  ew ork, eh  o
thats where he was bound  And this," he went on, turning out the
other flap.  "Ah see this, r. etherwick  ed got his passage
booked by the aratic, sailing tonight.  m  And atherfields gone
to outhampton, after Baseverie.  Im beginning to see a bit into this,
I think."

"What do you see" asked etherwick.

"Well, it looks to me as if Baseverie had gone ahead to collect that
box containing the ewels, and that Ambrose was to follow later, oin
him there, when Baseverie had secured the loot, and that they were then
to be off with their harvest  Butdo you notice thisthe name under
which the passage is booked  ot Ambroseharles Andrews, squire.
Andrews  And Baseverie is Basing.  Basing and Andrews.  ow I wonder
if they carried on business here under these names"

"hats an unimportant detail," said etherwick.  "he important thing,
surely, isthat  ow did that man come by his death"

"Well, but I dont think that is very importantust now," replied
obmore.  "After all, he is dead, and whether he died as the result of
a sudden seizure, or whether Baseverie cleverly poisoned him before he
left, is a question well have to settle later.  But Ill tell you
what, r. etherwickIll lay anything he didnt poison himself  ook
roundthere isnt a sign of anything hes been drinking out of.  o,
sirthe other mans done this.  And if atherfield has the luck to lay
hands on him tonightah  But now, what was this your clerk,
apperley, told us as we came along about the ittle mith treet
landlady coming here this afternoon"

"he was followed here by oldmark," replied etherwick.  "oldmark saw
her admit herself by a key which she took from her pocket.  he stayed
inside a few minutes, came out looking much upset, and hurried away to
her own house."

"And now you and Ill ust hurry after her," said obmore.  "After all,
shes living, and well make her find her tongue.  Of course, she came
in here expecting to find this man, and to tell him somebody was on the
lookout.  Andshe found him dead  ome round there with me, r.
etherwick, at once."

e turned to the other detective and the constable, and after giving
them some whispered instructions, left the room, etherwick, after a
word or two with apperley, following him.  But before they had reached
the outer door, they heard steps in the yard, and suddenly two men
appeared in the doorway.

If etherwick and his companion looked questioningly at these two men,
they, on their part, looked questioningly at obmore and etherwick.
hey were youngish menetherwick set them down as respectablydressed
artisans.  hat they were surprised to find anyone confronting them at
the door whereat all four now stood, was evident their surprise,
indeed, was so great that they came to a sudden halt, staring silently.
But obmore spoke.  "Wanting somebody" he asked sharply.

he two strangers exchanged a glance, and the apparently elder one
replied

"Well, no" he said.  "ot that we know of.  But might we ask if you
are  And how you got in here  Because this place happens to be ours"

"ours" exclaimed obmore.  "our property

"Well, if buying it, paying for it, and taking a receipt and papers
makes it so" answered the man.  "Bought it this morningand settled
up for it, too, anyway."

obmore produced and handed over a professional card, and the faces of
the two men fell as they read it.  he elder looked up quickly.

"I hope theres nothing wrong" he said anxiously.  "etectives, eh
Weve laid out a nice bit on thissavings, too, and"

"I dont suppose theres anything wrong that way," replied obmore
reassuringly.  "But theres something uncommonly wrong in other ways.
ow look here, who are you two, and from whom did you buy this place"

"y names arshall, his is Wilkinson," answered the leader.  "Were
ust starting business for ourselves as electrical engineers.  We
advertised for a likely place hereabouts, and r. Andrews came to us
about thissaid he and his partner, r. Basing, were leaving, and
wanted to sell it, ust as it stood.  We came to look at it, and as
its ust the place we need to start with, we agreed to buy it.  hey
said it was their own property, and to save law expenses we carried out
the purchase between ourselves.  And we paid over the purchase money
this morning, and got the papers and the key."

"What time was that" asked obmore.

"en oclock or thereabouts," replied arshall.  "By appointment, here."

"id ye see both menBasing and Andrews"

"Both  In that little room to the right.  We settled the
businesspaid them in cashand settled all up.  It was soon done,
then they stood us a drink and a cigar, and we went."

"tood you a drink, eh" said obmore suddenly.  "Where"

"ere  Basing, he pulled out a big bottle of champagne and a
cigarbox, and said wed wet the bargain.  Wed a glass apiece,
Wilkinson and me, then we left em to finish the bottle we were in a
hurry.  Butis anything wrong"

"What is wrong, my lad, is that the man you know as Andrews is lying
dead upstairs" replied obmore.  "oisoned, most likely, by his
partner.  But, as I said ust now, I dont suppose theres anything
wrong about your buying the property, providing you can show a title to
it you say youve got the necessary papers"

arshall clapped a hand on the pocket of his coat.

"ot em all here, now," he said.  "Butdid you say Andrews was
deadpoisoned  Why, he was as alive as I am when we left the two of
em together.  hey were finishing the bottle"

"ook here," interrupted obmore.  "Wait awhile until we come
backweve some important work close by.  here are people of ours
upstairstell them I said you were to wait a bit.  ow, r.
etherwick."

Outside the yard and in the crowded street, obmore turned to his
companion with a cynical laugh.

"hampagneto wet the bargain" he said.  "eft them to finish it, eh
And no doubt what finished Ambrose was in that champagneslipped in by
Baseverie when his back was turned.  Ill tell you what it is, r.
etherwick, that chaps a thoroughpaced unhe goes the whole hog  I
only hope he wont be too deep for atherfield at outhampton  I shall
be anxious till I hear."

"Is it possible for him to escape atherfield" exclaimed etherwick.
"ow can he  I look on him as being as good as in custody already
es bound to call at the post office for that box."

"Is he, though" interrupted the detective, with another incredulous
laugh.  "Im not so sure about that, r. etherwick.  Baseverie is
evidently an accomplished scoundrel, and full of all sorts of tricks
Ill tell ye what Im wonderingwill that parcel ever get to
outhampton post office, where its to be called for"

"Whatever do you mean" demanded etherwick.  "Its in the post
osted this morning."

"o doubt," agreed obmore dryly.  "By special delivery, eh  And when
it gets to outhampton tation, its got to be taken to the head post
office, hasnt it"

"Well" asked etherwick.

"heres many a slip twixt cup and lipso the old saying goes,"
replied obmore.  "hat parcel may slip.  But isnt this the number
your clerk mentioned"

he door of rs. alletts house looked more closely barred than
everif possible.  And no answer came to several summonses by bell and
knocker.  But presently obmore tried the handlethe door opened at
his touch.

"allo" he exclaimed.  "Open  m  hat seems a bit queer.
Wellinside"

or the second time that afternoon, etherwick walked into a place that
seemed to be wholly deserted.




A I

WAOO

he detective, walking a little in advance of his companion, stepped
forward to a halltable and knocked loudly on its polished surface.  o
answer came.  e went further along, to the head of a railed stair
which evidently communicated with a cellar kitchen again he knocked,
more loudly than before, on an adacent panel, and again got no reply.
And at that, turning back along the hall, he opened the door of the
room which faced upon the street, and he and etherwick looked in.  A
mustysmelling, closecurtained room that, a sort of unday parlour,
little used, cold and comfortless in its formality.  But the room
behind it, to which obmore turned next, showed signs of recent
occupancy and life.  here was a fire in the grate, with an easy chair
drawn near to it on the table close by lay womens geara heap of
linen, with needle and thread thrust in, a workbasket, scissors,
thimble it required no more than a glance to see that the owner of
these innocent matters had laid them down suddenly, suddenly
interrupted in her task.

"Ill tell you what it is, r. etherwick" exclaimed obmore abruptly.
"his house is empty  mpty of people, anyway."

"ilent enough, to be sure," agreed etherwick.  "he woman"

"ouve frightened her by calling here," said obmore.  "hen she
slipped round to encove treet.  And there she found Ambrose dead
hes some connection with him and Baseverie, because she possesses a
key that admits to that yard.  And finding Ambrose dead, she came back
here, got her things and cleared out.  here isnt a soul in this
house.  Ill lay anything on that"

"It struck me that this might be the place where the two ladies were
detained," remarked etherwick.

"Well soon see about that," declared obmore.  "ome upstairswell
search the place from top to bottom.  But stop, downstairs first."

e ran down the stair to the cellar kitchen, with etherwick at his
heels.  And at the door he laughed, pointing within.

"ook there" he exclaimed.  "I told you youd interrupted things.
ee theres one teatray, laid out all ready for twocups and
saucers, teapot, bread and butter cut, cake.  heres another for one.
And theres the kettle, singing away like a bird on a bough.  Whats
that mean  he woman was going to carry up tea for two, somewhere
tother tray was for herself.  Well, you nipped that in the bud shell
have to get her tea somewhere.  Butthe others  ome upstairs."

oing back to the hall, he led the way up the main staircase.  here
were two stories above the ground floor on the first were rooms the
doors of which, being opened, or being found open, revealed nothing but
ordinary things of these rooms there were three, opening off a main
landing.  But on the next floor there were only two rooms one was
unfurnished at the door of the other, a few inches aar, the detective
immediately paused.

"ook you there, now, r. etherwick" he said, pointing here and
there.  "eres recent work  o you see that a strong bolt, more like
a bar, has been fitted on the outside of this door, and the door itself
fitted with a new patent lock, key outside  And, good ord a chain as
well.  ight be in a gaol  But whats inside"

e pushed the door open and revealed a large room, fitted with two
small beds, easy chairs, a table on which books, magazines, newspapers
lay on the table, too, was fancywork which, it was evident, had been
as hastily laid aside as the sewing downstairs.  etherwick bent over
the things, but obmore went to the one window.

"aol, did I say" he exclaimed.  "Why, this is a gaol  ook here, r.
etherwickwindow morticed inside and fitted with iron bars outside.
ven if whoevers been in here could have opened the window, and if
thered been no bars there, they couldnt have done anything though,
for theres nothing but a high blank wall oppositeback of some
factory or other, apparently.  But whats this" he added, opening a
door that stood in a corner.  "m small bathroom.  And this," he
continued, going to a square hatch set in the wall next to the
staircase.  "Ah trap big enough to hand things like small trays
through, but not big enough for a grown person to squeeze through.
Well, I shouldnt wonder if youre right, r. etherwickthis,
probably, is where these ladies were locked up.  Buttheyre gone"

etherwick was looking round.  uddenly his eyes lighted on a familiar
obect.  e stepped forward, and from a chair near one of the beds,
picked up a handbag of green silk.  e knew it well enough.

"hat settles it" he exclaimed.  "hey have been here  his is iss
anI mean iss eatherstones bagIve seen her carry it often.
hese are her things in itpurse, cardcase, so on.  hes left it
behind her."

"Aye, ust so" agreed obmore.  "As I say, they all left in a hurry.
I figure it out like this the woman, who, of course, acted as sort of
gaoler to these two unfortunate ladies, when she made that discovery
round yonder, came back here, got her outdoor things, and cleared off.
But before she went, shed the decency to slip up here, undo that
chain, slip the bolt back, and turn the key  hen, no doubt, she made
tracks at express speed, leaving the ladies to do what they liked.  And
they, r. etherwick, having a bit o common sense about em, did what
I should ha donethey hooked it as quick as possible.  hats that,
sir"

etherwick thrust honas handbag into his pocket and made for the door.

"hen Im off, obmore," he said.  "I must try to find out where
theyve gone.  Ive an idea probably theyd go to enteneys office.
Ill go there.  Butyou"

"Oh, Im going back to encove treet," answered obmore.  "lenty to
do there.  But off you go after the ladies, r. etherwick, theres
nothing you can do round here now.  Ill keep that clerk of yours a
bit, and the ew chapthey might come in.  We shall have some nice
revelations in the papers tomorrow, Im thinking, especially if
atherfield has the luck he expects."

"What are you going to do about this house" asked etherwick as they
went downstairs.  "o you think the woman will come back"

"Bet your life she wont" answered obmore.  "ot she  I should think
shes halfway across ondonnorth, south, east or west, by this.
ouse  Why, I shall ust lock the front door and put the key in my
pocket.  We shall want to search this house narrowly."

etherwick bade him goodday for the time being, and hurried off to
ictoria treet, to fling himself into the first disengaged taxicab he
encountered, and to bid its driver go as speedily as possible to
incolns Inn ields.  e was anxious about honaand yet he felt that
she was safe.  And he was inquisitive, too he wanted to hear her
story, to find out what had happened behind the scenes.  e felt sure
of finding her at enteneys office she and adame istorelle, once
released from their prison, would naturally go there.

But the clerk whom he encountered as soon as he rushed into the outer
office, damped his spirits at once by shaking his head.

"r. enteneys not in, sir," he answered.  "e was in until not so
long ago, but he got a telephone call and went out immediately
afterwards.  o, I dont know who it was that rang him up, r.
etherwick, nor where he went seemed a bit excited when he went out,
and was in a fearful hurry."

etherwick concluded that adame istorelle had summoned enteney, and
that he had gone to meet her and hona.  e went away, somewhat at a
lossthen, remembering that atherfield had promised to wire from
outhampton, he turned towards his chambers.  At the foot of the stairs
he met his caretaker.

"Been a young lady here inquiring for you, r. etherwick," said the
man.  "Been here twice.  I said I didnt know when youd be inany
time or no time.  he saidbut there is the young lady, sircoming
back"

etherwick turned sharply and saw hona coming across the square.
urrying to meet her and disregarding whatever eyes might be watching
them, he took both her hands in his in a fashion that brought the
colour to her cheeks.

"oure all rightsafe" he asked quickly.

"ure"

"Im all right and quite safe, thank you," she answered.  "IIve been
here twice before, but you were out.  I came to borrow some money.  I
left my bag and purse inthe place where we were locked up, and"

etherwick pulled out the handbag and silently gave it to her.  he
stared at him.

"ouve beenthere" she exclaimed.  "ow"

"ot in this afternoon, an hour ago," he answered.  "ere, come up to
my rooms  We cant stand talking here.  adame istorellewheres
she"

"I left her at ictoria, telephoning to aor enteney," replied hona.
"he, too, had no money.  he wanted me to wait until aor enteney
arrived, but I wouldnt.  I walked here.  II thought youd want to
know that wed got outat last."

etherwick said nothing until they had entered his sittingroom.  hen,
staring silently at her, he put his hands on honas shoulders, and
after a long look at her, suddenly and impulsively bent and kissed her.

"By gad" he said in a low voice.  "I didnt know how anxious I was
about you until I saw you ust now  Butnow I know"

hen, ust as suddenly, he turned away from her, and in a
matteroffact manner lighted his stove, put on a kettle of water, and
began preparations which indicated his intention of making tea.  hona,
from an easy chair into which he had unceremoniously thrust her,
watched him.

"iberty" she said suddenly.  "Were both discovering something.  When
youve been locked up, day and night, for a while"

"ow was it" he asked, turning on her.  "Of course, we know all about
the kidnappingbut the rest, until today  Baseverie, of course"

"Baseverie and another man," she answered.  "A tall, cleanshaven man,
whose name we never heard.  But Baseverie was the chief villain.  As to
how it was, they met us at the sunk road at iversreade, forced us at
the point of revolvers into a car, and drove us off to ondonto
Westminsterand into a house there, the house youve been in.
here"

"A moment," said etherwick, who was finding cups and saucers.  "he
driver of that car  e must have been an accomplice."

"o doubt, but we never saw him again.  We only saw those two and a
woman who acted as gaoler and brought our meals.  We were fed all
right, and they gave us books and papers, and actually provided us with
fancy work.  But they were inexorable about madame and her ewels.
hey must have known all about them, because they got her own
notepaper"

"I know all about that," said etherwick.  "Ill tell you my side of it
when youve had some tea.  orced her, I suppose, to write the letters"

"hey forced her to do that ust as they forced us into the car," said
hona, "with revolvers  Andthey meant it.  I suppose theyve got the
ewels now"

"emains to be seen," replied etherwick.  "id adame istorelle
happen to tell you what those ewels were worth"

"he talked about little else.  Between eighty and ninety thousand
pounds.  hes in an awful state about them.  But it was literally a
question of her life or her ewels.  I dont know what theyd have done
with me.  But nowIm all right"

etherwick opened a tin box, and producing a plum cake, held it up for
hona to inspect.

"What dyou think of that for a cake" he asked admiringly.  "resent
from my old aunt in the countryreal, proper cake that.  es," he went
on, setting the cake on the table, "yes, yes youre all right now.
But, by eorge"

hona said nothing she saw that his relief at seeing her was greater
and deeper than he cared to show.  he poured out the tea they sat
discussing the recent events until dusky shadows began to fall over the
whole room.

"I ought to be getting back to iversreade," she remarked at last.
"Its late."

"Wait a bit" said etherwick, who by that time had told her all he
knew.  "herell be a wire from atherfield before long.  ont go down
to iversreade tonight.  elephone to ady iversreade that youre
staying in town.  er sister will be there by now, and will have told
her everything.  Wait till we get the wire from atherfield then well
go and dine somewhere, and you can put up at your old hotel in urrey
treet for the night.  I want you to know whats happened at
outhampton and"

e broke off as a knock came at his outer door.

"hatll be atherfields wire," he exclaimed "ow then"

A moment later he came back to her with the message in his hand.

"It is from atherfield," he said.  "anded in outhampton West
sixnineteen.  oesnt say if hes got him  All he says is eet me
Waterloo, arriving eighttwenty.  Well"

"I wonder" said hona.  "But Baseverie is"

"ust what obmore says," muttered etherwick.

"owever" he looked at his watch.  "ome along," he continued.
"Weve ust time to get some dinnerat Waterlooand to be on the
platform when the eighttwenty comes in.  If only we could see
Baseverie in charge of atherfield and uigman first it would give me
an appetite"

he vast space between the station buildings and the entrance to the
platform at Waterloo was thronged when etherwick and hona came out of
the restaurant at ten minutes past eight.  etherwick was inquiring as
to which platform the outhampton train would come in at when he felt a
light touch on his arm.  urning sharply he saw obmore.  obmore gave
him a quiet smile, coupled with an informing wink.

"uess youre on the same ob, r. etherwick," he said.  "Wire from
atherfield, eh"

"es," replied etherwick.  "And you"

"ame here," assented obmore.  "ust to say I was to be here for the
eighttwentywith help," he added significantly.  "Ive got the help
theres four of us round about.  eard anything of those ladies, r.
etherwick"

"ere is one of them," replied etherwick, indicating hona.  "heyre
safe.  oull hear all about it later.  But this businesswhat do you
make of atherfields wire  as he failed"

"Ill tell you what I make of it," answered obmore.  "I think youll
find that Baseverie is on the train, with atherfield and uigman in
close attendance.  or some reason of his own, atherfield means to
arrest Baseverie herehere  hats how I figure it.  heyve seen
Baseverie there and decided to follow him back to town.  As soon as
that trains in"

A sudden, sharp exclamation from hona interrupted him and made both
men turn to her.  he clutched etherwicks arm, at the same time
pointing with the other hand across the space behind them.

"Baseveriehimself" she said.  "hereunder that clock  ee  es
going towards the gates"

With a swift and unceremonious gesture obmore laid a hand on honas
shoulder, twisted her round and drew her amongst a group of bystanders.

"eep out of sight, miss" he muttered.  "ell know you  ow,
againwhich man.  hat with the pale face and high hat  I see him.
ood to remember, too.  All right  top here, you two.  If he moves in
this direction, r. etherwick, move away anywhere.  Wait"

obmore slipped away.  A moment later they saw him speak to a couple of
quietlooking men, who presently glanced at Baseverie.  etherwick was
watching Baseverie, too.  Baseverie, quiet, unconcerned, evidently
wholly unsuspicious, had taken up a position at the exit through which
the outhampton passengers must emerge he was smoking a cigar,
placidly, with obvious appreciation.

"oure certain thats the man" whispered etherwick.

"Baseverie  ositive" declared hona.  "As if I could mistake him
Ive too good reason to remember his whole appearance.  Buthere
aring"

"Well," said etherwick, "somethings going to happen  eep backkeep
well back  We can see things from here without being seen.  If he
caught sight of you"

obmore came strolling back and oined them.

"All right" he murmured.  "our pairs of eyes, beside oursthats
three pairs moreon him  y men are close up to him, too.  ee em
One, two, three, four  All round him, though he doesnt know.  I
shant let him go, whether atherfield turns up or not.  ool customer,
eh"

"he trains due," said etherwick.  e had honas hand within his
arm, and he felt it tremble.  "es," he whispered, bending down to her,
"thats how I feel.  ense moment, this.  But that scoundrel there"

Baseverie was glancing at the big clock.  e turned from it to the
platform behind the gates, looking expectantly along its lighted
surface.  he others looked, too.  A minute passed.  hen, out of the
gloom at the further extremity of the vast station, an engine appeared,
slowly dragging its burden of carriages and came sighing like a weary
giant up the side of the platform.  he passengers in the front
compartments leapt out and began filing towards the exit.

"ow for it," muttered obmore.  "eep back, you two  y menll watch
himand whoevers here to meet him, for hes expecting somebody."

othing happened for the first minute.  he crowd of discharged
passengers, men and women, civilians, soldiers, sailors, filed out and
went their ways.  radually it thinned.  hen etherwicks arm was
suddenly gripped by hona for the second time, and he saw that she was
staring at something beyond the barrier.

"here" she exclaimed.  "herethe man in the grey coat and fawn hat
hats the man who drove the car  ee  Baseverie sees him"

etherwick looked and saw Baseverie lift a hand in recognition of a
young, freshfaced man, who was nearing the ticketcollectors, and who
carried in his right hand a small, square parcel.  But he saw more.
lose behind this young man came atherfield on one hand and uigman on
the other.  hey drew closer as he neared the gate, and on its other
side the detectives drew closer to Baseverie.

"ow then," whispered obmore, and stole swiftly forward.

It was all over so swiftly that neither etherwick nor hona knew
exactly how the thing was done.  Before they had realised that the men
were trapped, or the gaping bystanders had realised that something was
happening under their very noses, Baseverie and his man were two safely
handcuffed prisoners in the midst of a little group of silent men who
were hurrying both away.  Within a moment captors and captives were
lost in the outer reaches of the station.  hen the two watchers
suddenly realised that atherfield, holding the square parcel in his
hand, was standing close by, a grim but highly satisfied smile in his
eyes.  e held the parcel up before them.

"ery neat, r. etherwick, very neat indeed" he said.  "ncommonly
neateh"

But etherwick knew that he was not referring to the parcel.




A II

 AA

hona went back to her old quarters at the little hotel in urrey
treet for that night, and next morning etherwick came round to her,
with an armful of newspapers.  inding her alone, he laid them on the
table at her side with a significant nod of his head at certain big
black letters which topped the uppermost columns.

"atherfield must have given plenty of informing news to the pressmen
last night," he remarked with a grim smile.  "Its all in therehis
own adventures at outhampton yesterday mine and obmores in
Westminster, and all the rest of it.  I believe the newspaper people
call this sort of thing a storyand a fine story it makes  Winding
up, of course, with the dramatic arrest of Baseverie at Waterloo  Im
afraid were in for publicity for a time, worse luck"

"hall weshall Ihave to appear at that mans trial" asked hona.

"hats unavoidable, Im afraid, and at other things before that,"
answered etherwick.  "herell be the proceedings before the
magistrate, and the adourned inquest, and so on.  ant be helped and
therell be some satisfaction in knowing that were ridding the world
of a peculiarly cruel and coldblooded murderer  hat chap Baseverie
is certainly as consummate a villain as I ever heard of.  A human
spiderand clever in his webspinning.  But I wish one had a few more
particulars on one pointand yet I dont see how ones to get them."

"What point" asked hona.

"hat sealed packet, containing the details, or formula, or whatever it
is, of your grandfathers invention," replied etherwick.  "Where is
it  What, precisely, is it  id Ambrose get it from him  as
Baseverie got it  o far as I can make out, the whole thing began with
that.  Whether it was really worth a farthing or a fortune, your
grandfather brought to ondon something which he honestly believed to
be of great value, and theres no doubt that he got into the hands of
those two men, Ambrose and Baseverie, because of it.  heres no doubt,
either, that in conversation with them, he told them, perhaps okingly,
what he knew about adame istorelle.  or is there any doubt that
these two murdered him.  or is there any doubt, in my mind, as to
how they murdered him  ou must remember that both men were trained
medical men, and, obviously of a scientific turn of mind into the
bargain.  ach had doubtless made a deep study of poisons.  uch a
knowledge is of value to such men as they weremen of criminal
tendencies.  robably they knew of a subtle poison easily administered,
the effects of which would not be evident for some hours.  o doubt
they timed their work, so that their victim should die swiftly and
suddenly when well away from their laboratory.  And, of course, they
did the same thing in the case of ranett.  ranett paid the penalty of
being with your grandfather.  But for what did they murder your
grandfather  id they get rid of him so that they could keep his
secret about adame istorelle to themselves, and blackmail her and her
sister, or that they could rob him of his invention and turn it to
their own profit  If the latter, then"

e paused, looking inquiringly at hona, as if he expected her to see
what he was after.  But hona shook her head.

"I dont follow," she said.  "What then"

"his," replied etherwick.  "If their desire to get hold of your
grandfathers secret was their motive, then that secrets worth a lot
of money  oney which ought to come to you.  ont you see  Where is
the secret  Wheres the sealed packet  I suppose the police would
search Baseverie last nightperhaps they found it on him.  We shall
hearbut, anyway its yours."

hona made a gesture of aversion.

"I should hate to touch or have anything to do with it if it had been
in that mans possession" she said.  "But I dont think theres any
doubt that they murdered my grandfather because of that secret.  Only,
I think, too, theyd a double motive.  he secret about adame
istorelle was their second string.  robably they believed that ady
iversreade would be an easy prey.  And I think she would have been, if
she hadnt had aor enteney to fall back on.  I know she was
dreadfully upset after Baseveries first visit.  o I put it this
wayalways have done they thought they could sell grandfathers
invention for a lot of money, and get another lot out of ady
iversreade and adame istorelle as blackmail."

"Black money, indeed, all of it" exclaimed etherwick.  "Well"

A womanservant put her head into the little parlour in which they were
sitting, and looked significantly at hona.

"heres a policeman downstairs, miss, asking for you," she announced.
"eastways, he wants to know if you can tell him if r. etherwicks
here or been here."

etherwick went to the head of the stair a policeman standing in the
hall below looked up and touched his helmet.

"Inspector atherfields compliments, sir, and could you step round and
bring iss annaford with you" he asked.  "heres new developments,
r. etherwick.  Important"

"Well come at once," assented etherwick.  "en minutes"  e went
back and hurried hona away.  "What now" he asked as they hastened
towards atherfields office.  "erhaps theyve extracted something out
of Baseverie  Or possibly the newspapers have attracted the attention
of somebody who can give further news"

he last suggestion strengthened itself when, on entering atherfields
room, they found him closeted with two strangers whose appearance was
that of responsible and welltodo commercial men.  All three were
discovered in what looked like a serious and deep conversation, and
etherwick was quick to notice that the two unknown men looked at hona
with unusual interest.  atherfield made haste to introduce her as the
late exuperintendent annafords granddaughter, and etherwick as a
gentleman who had been much concerned in the recent proceedings.

"hese gentlemen, iss annaford and r. etherwick," he proceeded,
waving his hand at the others, "are essrs. ulthwaite and ouseover,
manufacturing chemists, of ast amincidentally, theyve also a big
place in ancashire.  And having seen this mornings papers, in which,
as youve no doubt noticed, theres a good deal about our affair,
theyve come straight to me with some news which will prove uncommonly
useful when Baseveries put in the dock before the magistrate this
afternoon.  he fact is, r. etherwick, these gentlemen have supplied
a missing link"

"What link" asked etherwick eagerly.

atherfield nodded at the elder of the two men, ulthwaite, who
produced a pocketbook, and extracted from it a sheet of paper.
ilently, he passed it over to atherfield, who turned to hona.

"ow, iss annaford," he said, with a note of triumph in his voice, "I
dare say you can positively identify your grandfathers handwriting and
his way of making figures  an you swear that this has been written by
him"

hona gave but one glance at the paper before looking up with a glance
of positive assertion.

"Oh, yes" she exclaimed.  "hat is his writing, without a doubt
othing could be more certain"

atherfield turned to etherwick.

"hats the formula for the ink" he said.  "ow weve got the big
thing we wanted  And r. ulthwaite will tell you how he got it."

ulthwaite, after allowing etherwick to look at the paper, carefully
replaced it in his pocketbook.  here was an air of anxiety about him
and about his partner concerning which etherwick began to make
guessesthey looked as if they were uncertain and uneasy.  But
ulthwaite was ready enough to tell his story.

"We got it in this way," he said.  "And I may as well say, as Ive
already said to you, r. atherfield, that I dont think we should have
got it at all if you police people hadnt been so reticent on that one
particular pointif youd noised it abroad about annafords secret we
might have been forewarned.  owever, some little time ago, a man whom
we knew as Basing, and whom I firmly believe to be the Baseverie that
weve read about in the papers this morninga man, mind you, that wed
done business with now and then during the last year or socame to us
and offered us the formula for a new black ink which he asserted would
drive every known ink off the market, all over the world  e made
extravagant claims for it he swore it was the first absolutely perfect
writing fluid ever invented.  e brought a sample of it which hed made
up himselfhe put it to various tests.  But he did morehe offered us
the use of the secret formula so that we ourselves could make and test
it before deciding whether wed fall in with his suggestion, which was
that we should offer him a lump cash sum for the formula.  Well, we did
make the ink, from the formula, and we did test it, and there is no
doubt about itit is all, and perhaps more, that Basing, or Baseverie
claimed for its excellence.  I neednt go into the drawbacks attaching
to most wellknown inksthis has none of them.  And when Basing came
back to us, a few days ago, we decided to buy the formula from him.  We
agreed upon a cash price, and day before yesterday we paid the amount
overat our office in ast am."

"es" said etherwick quietly.  "Andwhat was the price agreed upon"

he two partners exchanged a glance it seemed to hona, who was
watching them intently, that they looked more uneasy than before.  But
ulthwaite replied with promptitude.

"en thousand pounds"

"ow did you pay him" asked etherwick.  "In cash"

"oby open cheque, at his own request.  hat, of course, was as good
as cash.  But," continued ulthwaite, "as soon as we read the
newspapers this morning, wethat is, I, for I read the whole thing on
my way to businesswent at once to our bank to see if the cheque had
been cashed.  It hadan hour or two after wed handed it to Basing.
ed taken the amount in Bank of ngland notes."

etherwick looked at atherfield.

"Of course," he remarked, as if he were asking a question, "that
formula belongs to iss annaford  Baseverie had no right to sell
ithe stole it"

"hats the fact, r. etherwick," assented atherfield.  "hese
gentlemen, innocently enough, bought stolen property.  But Ive ust
told them something that Ill now tell you.  We found the
moneynoteson Baseverie, last night.  Intactin his pocketbook.
Of course, with that, and the ewels which his accomplice succeeded in
getting at outhampton, hed got a nice haul.  But now we can easily
prove how he came by that ten thousandand itll go back to essrs.
ulthwaite and ouseover there.  We can prove, too, from their
evidence, that Baseverie poisoned r. annaford for the sake of that
formula.  Baseveries done"

"hese gentlemen will recover their ten thousand pounds, then" said
etherwick.  "In that case"he turned to the two partners"I dont
see that youve anything to worry about" he suggested.  "he formula,
of course, must be handed over to"

"Well, now, thats ust it, r. etherwick," interrupted the partner
who until then had kept silent.  "he fact is, sir, we dont want to
lose that formula  We gave this man Baring or Baseverie ten thousand
pounds for it, but"

"But you really believe it to be worth more, eh" said etherwick with
a smile.  "I see  hen in that case"

"If we get back our ten thousand, sir, we shall be pleased to treat
with the rightful owner," said ulthwaite, after an exchange of looks
with his partner.  "In the meantime, the formula is safe and secret
with us.  We are wellknown people"

"Well leave it at that, ust now," answered etherwick.  "iss
annaford will trust you to keep your word about safety and secrecy.
And laterbusiness"  e got up, and hona rose with him.  "hall you
want us today, atherfield" he asked.  "If not"

"o" replied atherfield.  "erely formal business todaythen, this
afternoon, hell be brought up.  Only evidence of arrest and
application for adournment.  ou can go away, r. etherwickwell
let you both know when youre wanted."

etherwick led hona out, and once clear of the police precincts, smote
his stick on the pavement.

"When were through with this business Im hanged if I ever dabble in
crime affairs again, personally" he exclaimed.  "Baseverie has been a
pretty vile example to tackle  And that you should be dragged into it,
too" he added, suddenly.  "hat upset me more than anything.  owever,
its getting to an end, and then"

e paused, while she looked up at him with a little wonder at his
vehemence.  hen, and as they were at that moment walking along a quiet
stretch of the less frequented side of the mbankment, she timidly laid
a hand on his arm.  e turned sharply, laying his hand on hers.

"I think youve been very considerate and thoughtful for me," she said.
"After allit wasnt quite mere interest in crime that made you"

"ood ord, no" he exclaimed quickly.  "At first, perhaps, half
thathalf you  I feltsomehowthat Id got to look after you.  And
thenand when you disappearedbut I believe Im a bit muddleheaded
Ill tell you somethingall that time you were lost, Iwell, I
scarcely ever slept  Wondering, you know.  And when you turned up
yesterday afternoonbut I want to ask you something that Im not quite
clear aboutI was certainly muddled ust then"

"What is it" she asked.

etherwick bent down to her and dropped his voice.

"I was so glad, so relieved to see you, yesterday afternoon," he said,
"thatthat I felt dazedeh  And I want to knowdid I kiss you"

hona suddenly looked up at himand laughed.

"Oh, really, how amusing you are" she said.  "Why, of course, you did
wice"

"hats good" he exclaimed.  "II thought perhaps Id dreamt it.
Butdid you kiss me"

"o you really want to be dead sure" asked hona mischievously.  "ery
wellI did"

"hats better" said etherwick.




 









nd of roect utenbergs he haring ross ystery, by . . letcher

  O I O B BOO  AI O  

 his file should be named .txt or .zip 
his and all associated files of various formats will be found in
        httpwww.gutenberg.org

roduced by Al aines
pdated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

reating the works from print editions not protected by .. copyright
law means that no one owns a nited tates copyright in these works,
so the oundation (and you) can copy and distribute it in the nited
tates without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. pecial rules, set forth in the eneral erms of se part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing roect
utenbergtm electronic works to protect the O Btm
concept and trademark. roect utenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. ou may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. hey may be modified and printed and given
awayyou may do practically AI in the nited tates with eBooks
not protected by .. copyright law. edistribution is subect to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

A  I

  O B I
A A I BO O IIB O  I WO

o protect the roect utenbergtm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "roect
utenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the ull
roect utenbergtm icense available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.orglicense.

ection . eneral erms of se and edistributing roect
utenbergtm electronic works

.A. By reading or using any part of this roect utenbergtm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademarkcopyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of roect utenbergtm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
roect utenbergtm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
...

.B. "roect utenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. here are a few
things that you can do with most roect utenbergtm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. ee
paragraph . below. here are a lot of things you can do with roect
utenbergtm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to roect utenbergtm
electronic works. ee paragraph . below.

.. he roect utenberg iterary Archive oundation ("the
oundation" or A), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of roect utenbergtm electronic works. early all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the nited
tates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
nited tates and you are located in the nited tates, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to roect utenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the roect utenbergtm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing roect utenbergtm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
roect utenbergtm name associated with the work. ou can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full roect utenbergtm icense when
you share it without charge with others.

.. he copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. opyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the nited tates,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other roect utenbergtm work. he oundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the nited tates.

.. nless you have removed all references to roect utenberg

... he following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full roect utenbergtm icense must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a roect utenbergtm work (any work
on which the phrase "roect utenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "roect utenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed

  his eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited tates and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. ou may copy it, give it away or reuse it
  under the terms of the roect utenberg icense included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  nited tates, youll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

... If an individual roect utenbergtm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by .. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the nited tates without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "roect
utenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs .. through .. or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the roect utenbergtm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs .. or ...

... If an individual roect utenbergtm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .. through .. and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the roect utenbergtm icense for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

... o not unlink or detach or remove the full roect utenbergtm
icense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with roect utenbergtm.

... o not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the roect
utenbergtm icense.

... ou may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. owever, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a roect utenbergtm work in a format
other than "lain anilla AII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official roect utenbergtm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "lain
anilla AII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full roect utenbergtm icense as specified in paragraph ...

... o not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any roect utenbergtm works
unless you comply with paragraph .. or ...

... ou may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing roect utenbergtm electronic works
provided that

 ou pay a royalty fee of  of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of roect utenbergtm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. he fee is owed
  to the owner of the roect utenbergtm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the roect
  utenberg iterary Archive oundation. oyalty payments must be paid
  within  days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. oyalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the roect
  utenberg iterary Archive oundation at the address specified in
  ection , "Information about donations to the roect utenberg
  iterary Archive oundation."

 ou provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by email) within  days of receipt that she
  does not agree to the terms of the full roect utenbergtm
  icense. ou must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of roect utenbergtm
  works.

 ou provide, in accordance with paragraph .., a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days of
  receipt of the work.

 ou comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of roect utenbergtm works.

... If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a roect
utenbergtm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the roect utenberg iterary Archive oundation and he
roect utenberg rademark , the owner of the roect utenbergtm
trademark. ontact the oundation as set forth in ection  below.

..

... roect utenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by .. copyright law in creating the roect
utenbergtm collection. espite these efforts, roect utenbergtm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "efects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

... II WAA, IAI O AA  xcept for the "ight
of eplacement or efund" described in paragraph .., the roect
utenberg iterary Archive oundation, the owner of the roect
utenbergtm trademark, and any other party distributing a roect
utenbergtm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. O A A O A O I O I, I
IABII, BA O WAA O BA O OA  O
OI I AAA ... O A A  OAIO, 
AA OW, A A IIBO  I A WI O B
IAB O O O AA, I, II, OIA, II O
IIA AA  I O I OI O  OIBII O 
AA.

... II I O A O   If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. he person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

... xcept for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .., this work is provided to you AI, WI O
O WAAI O A I,  O II, II B O
II O WAAI O AABII O I O A O.

... ome states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. he invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

... II  ou agree to indemnify and hold the oundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the oundation, anyone
providing copies of roect utenbergtm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of roect utenbergtm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur (a) distribution of this
or any roect utenbergtm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any roect utenbergtm work, and (c) any
efect you cause.

ection . Information about the ission of roect utenbergtm

roect utenbergtm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middleaged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

olunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching roect utenbergtms
goals and ensuring that the roect utenbergtm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In , the roect
utenberg iterary Archive oundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for roect utenbergtm and future
generations. o learn more about the roect utenberg iterary
Archive oundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
ections  and  and the oundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



ection . Information about the roect utenberg iterary Archive oundation

he roect utenberg iterary Archive oundation is a non profit
(c)() educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of ississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
evenue ervice. he oundations I or federal tax identification
number is . ontributions to the roect utenberg iterary
Archive oundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
.. federal laws and your states laws.

he oundations principal office is in airbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address O Box , airbanks, A , but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at  orth  West, alt
ake ity,  , () . mail contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the oundations web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.orgcontact

or additional contact information

    r. regory B. ewby
    hief xecutive and irector
    gbnewbypglaf.org

ection . Information about onations to the roect utenberg
iterary Archive oundation

roect utenbergtm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. any small donations
( to ,) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the I.

he oundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all  states of the nited
tates. ompliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. o 
OAIO or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the nited tates. .. laws alone swamp our small staff.

lease check the roect utenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. onations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. o
donate, please visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate

ection . eneral Information About roect utenbergtm electronic works.

rofessor ichael . art was the originator of the roect
utenbergtm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. or forty years, he produced and
distributed roect utenbergtm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

roect utenbergtm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the .. unless a copyright notice is included. hus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

ost people start at our Web site which has the main  search
facility www.gutenberg.org

his Web site includes information about roect utenbergtm,
including how to make donations to the roect utenberg iterary
Archive oundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

