The roect utenberg ook of The haring ross Mystery, by . . letcher

This eook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited tates and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or reuse it under the terms of
the roect utenberg License included with this eook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  f you are not located in the nited tates, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title The haring ross Mystery

uthor . . letcher

elease ate uly ,  ook 

Language nglish

haracter set encoding T

 TT  T T T  T   MYTY 




roduced by l aines









T   MYTY


Y

. . LT



T  LMT

 Y TT, L, ..




 T ' 



ixth printing completing , copies



rinted in reat ritain by utler  Tanner Ltd., rome and London




TT


T

     .  T LT T T
    .   TT  T
   .  T TTL T
    .  T M L
     .  T L T
    .  ML  
   .  L LT
  .  L' T
    .  T M TTL
     .  T MYT  T
    .  LY 
   .  L MM LTLL
  .    
   .   T LML
    .  LT
   .  TLL M
  .  T T LL
 .  T TLM
   .  T L 
    .   T
   .  T   T
  .  T LYTL LT
 .  T LLY  LTTL MT TT
  .  T   T Y
   .  
  .  TL
 .  T 




T   MYTY


T 

T LT T T

etherwick had dined that evening with friends who lived in adogan
ardens, and had stayed so late in conversation with his host that
midnight had come before he left and set out for his bachelor chambers
in the Temple it was, indeed, by the fraction of a second that he
caught the last eastbound train at loane uare.  The train was
almost destitute of passengers the car which he himself entered, a
firstclass smoking compartment, was otherwise empty no one came into
it when the train reached ictoria.  ut at t. ames's ark two men
got in, and seated themselves opposite to etherwick.

ow etherwick was a young barrister, going in for criminal practice,
in whom the observant faculty was deeply implanted it was natural to
him to watch and to speculate on anything he saw.  ecause of this, and
perhaps because he had ust then nothing else to think about, he sat
observing the newcomers he found interest, amusement, and not a
little profit in this sort of thing, and in trying to decide whether a
given man was this, that, or something else.

f the two men thus under inspection, the elder was a big, burly,
freshcoloured man of apparently sixty to sixtyfive years of age.  is
closely cropped silvery hair, his smartly trained grey moustache, his
keen blue eyes and generally alert and vivacious appearance, made
etherwick think that he was or had been in some way or other connected
with the army this impression was heightened by an erect carriage,
suareset shoulders and something that suggested a long and close
acuaintance with the methods of the drillyard and the parade ground.
erhaps, thought etherwick, he was a retired noncommissioned officer,
a regimental sergeantmaor, or something of that sort this idea,
again, was strengthened by the fact that the man carried a handsome
walkingcane, the head of which, either of gold or of silvergilt, was
fashioned like a crown.  There was something military, too, about the
cut of his clothes he was a smartly dressed man, from his silk hat,
new and glossy and worn a little rakishly on the right side of his
head, to his highly polished boots.   wellpreserved, cheerylooking,
goodhumoured sort of person, this, decided etherwick, and apparently
well satisfied with himself and full of the enoyment of life, and
likely, from all outward sight, to make old bones.

The other man came into a different category.  The difference began
with his clothes, which, if not exactly shabby, were semishabby, much
worn, illkept and badly put on he was evidently a careless man, who
scorned a clothesbrush and was also indifferent to the very obvious
fact that his linen was frayed and dirty.  e was a thin, meagre man,
of not onehalf the respectable, wellfed bulk of his companion his
sallowcomplexioned face was worn, and his beard thin and irregular
altogether he suggested some degree of poor circumstances.  Yet, in
etherwick's opinion, he was a person of something beyond ordinary
mental capacity his eyes were large and intelligent, his nose was
wellshaped, his chin suare and determined.  nd his ungloved hands
were finely moulded and delicate of proportion the fingers were long,
thin and tapering.  etherwick noticed two facts about those fingers
the first, that they were restless the second, that they were much
stained, as if the man had recently been mixing dyes or using
chemicals.  nd then he suddenly observed that the big man's hands and
fingers were similarly stainedblue and red and yellow, in patches.

These men were talking when they entered the compartment they
continued to talk as they settled down.  etherwick could not avoid
hearing what they said.

"ueerest experience 've ever had in my time" the big man was saying
as he dropped into a corner seat.  "Tell you,  knew her the instant 
clapped eyes on that portrait  fterhow many years will it be, now
Ten,  thinkyes, ten.  h, yes  new her well enough.  hen we get
to my hotel, 'll show you the portrait cut it out and put it
asideand you'll identify it as uick as  didlay you aught you like
on it  o mistaking that"

This was said in a broad orth ountry accent, in full keeping, thought
etherwick, with the burly frame of the speaker.  ut the other man
replied in tones that suggested the born Londoner.

" think  shall be able to recognise it," he said softly.  "'ve a
very clear recollection of the lady, though, to be sure,  only saw her
once or twice."

"ye, well, a finelooking womanand a beautylike that's not soon
forgotten," declared the other.  "nd nowadays the years don't seem to
make much difference to a woman's age.  nyway,  knew her'That's
you, my fine madam,' says  to myself, as soon as ever  unfolded that
paper.  ut, mind you,  kept it to myself  ot a word to my
granddaughter, though she was sitting opposite to me when  made the
discovery.  onot to anybodytill tonight.  ot the sort of thing
to blab aboutthat"

"ust so," said the smaller man.  "f course, you'd remember that  was
likely to have some recollection of her and of the circumstances.
ddvery.  nd  suppose the next thing iswhat are you going to do
about it"

"h, well" replied the big man.  "f course, ten years have elapsed.
ut as to that, it wouldn't matter, you know, if twenty years had
slipped by.  till"

t that point he sank his voice to the least of a whisper, bending over
to his companion, and etherwick heard no more.  ut it seemed to him
that the little man, although he appeared to be listening intently,
was, in reality, doing nothing of the sort.  is long, stained fingers
became more restless than ever twice, before the train came to
estminster, he pulled out his watch and glanced at it once, after
that, etherwick caught the nervous hand again shaking towards the
waistcoat pocket.  nd he got an idea that the man was regarding his
big, garrulous companion with curiously furtive glances, as if he were
waiting for some vague, yet expected thing, and wondering when it would
materialise there was a covert watchfulness about him, and though he
nodded his head from time to time as if in assent to what was being
whispered to him, etherwick became convinced that he was either
abstracted in thought or taking no interest.  f eyes and fingers were
to be taken as indications, the man's thoughts were elsewhere.

The train pulled up at estminster, lingered its halfminute, moved
onward again the big man, still bending down to his companion, went on
whispering now and then, as if he were telling a good story or making
a clever point, he chuckled.  ut suddenly, and without any warning, he
paused, coming to a dead, sharpcut stop in an apparently easy flow of
language.  e stared wildly around him etherwick caught the flash of
his eye as it swept the compartment, and never forgot the look of
frightened amaement that he saw in it it was as if the man had been
caught, with lightninglike swiftness, face to face with some awful
thing.  is left hand shut up, clutching at his breast and throat the
other, releasing the goldheaded cane, shot out as if to ward off a
blow.  t dropped like lead at his side the other arm relaxed and
fell, limp and nerveless, and before etherwick could move, the big,
burly figure sank back in its corner and the eyes closed.

etherwick umped from his seat, shouting to the other man.

"Your friend" he cried.  "Look"

ut the other man was looking.  e, too, had got to his feet, and he
was bending down and stretching out a hand to the big man's wrist.  e
muttered something that etherwick failed to catch.

"hat do you say" demanded etherwick impatiently.  "ood heavenswe
must do something  The man'swhat is it   seiure"

" seiure" answered the other.  "Yesthat's ita seiure  e'd had
oneslight giddinessust before we got in.  the train's stopping,
though.  haring ross   know a doctor close by."

The train was already pulling up.  etherwick flung open the dividing
door between his compartment and the nexthe had seen the conductor
down there and he beckoned to him.

"uick" he called.  "erethere's a man illdying,  think  ome
here"

The conductor cameslowly.  ut when he saw the man in the corner, he
made for the outer door and beckoned to men on the platform.  
uniformed official ran up and got in.

"hat is it" he asked.  "entleman in a fit  ho's with him
nybody"

etherwick looked round for the man with the stained fingers.  ut he
was already out of the carriage and on the platform and making for the
stairs that led to the exit.  e flung back a few words, pointing
upward at the same time.

"octorclose by" he shouted.  "ack in five minutesget him out."

ut already there was a doctor at hand.  efore the man with the
stained fingers had fairly vanished, other men had come in from the
adoining compartments one pushed his way to the front.

" am a medical man," he said curtly.  "Make way, please."

The other men stood silently watching while the newcomer made a hasty
examination of the still figure.  e turned sharply.

"This man's dead" he said in uick, matteroffact tones.  "s anyone
with him"

The train officials glanced at etherwick.  ut etherwick shook his
head.

" don't know him," he answered.  "There was another man with himthey
got in together at t. ames's ark.  You saw the other man," he
continued, turning to the conductor.  "e umped out as you came in
here, and ran up the stairs, saying that he was going for some doctor,
close by."

" saw himheard him, too," assented the conductor.  e glanced at the
stairs and the exit beyond.  "ut he ain't come back," he added.

"You had better get the man out," said the doctor.  "ring him in to
some place on the platform."

 station policeman had come up by that time he and the railwaymen
lifted the dead man and carried him across the platform to a
waitingroom.  etherwick, feeling that he would be wanted, followed in
the rear, the doctor with him.  t struck etherwick with grim irony
that as soon as they were off it, the train went on, as if careless and
indifferent.

"ood heavens" he muttered, more to himself than to the man at his
side.  "That poor fellow was alive, and, as far as  could see, in the
very best of health and spirits, five minutes ago"

"o doubt" observed the doctor dryly.  "ut he's dead now.  hat
happened"

etherwick told him briefly.

"nd the other man'sgone" remarked the doctor.  "m  ut  suppose
nobody thought of detaining him.  owif he doesn't come backeh"

"You don't suspect foul play" exclaimed etherwick.

"The circumstances are odd," said his companion.  " should say the man
ust died  ied as suddenly as man can dieas if he'd been shot dead
or literally blown to fragments.  That's from what you tell me, you
know.  nd it may bea case of poisoning.  ill that other man come
back  f not"

y that time etherwick was beginning to wonder if the other man would
come back.  e had not come at the end of ten minutes nor of fifteen
nor of thirty.  ut other men had come, hurrying into the drabwalled
waitingroom and gathering about the table on which the dead man had
been laid.  They were mostly officials and police, and presently a
police surgeon arrived and with him a police inspector, one
Matherfield, who knew etherwick.  hile the two doctors made another
examination, this man drew etherwick aside.  etherwick retold his
story this time with full details.  Matherfield listened and shook his
head.

"That second man won't come back" he said.  "one half an hour now.
o you think he knew the man was dead before he cleared out"

" can't say," replied etherwick.  "The whole thing was so uick that
it was all over before  could realise what was happening.   certainly
saw the other man give the dead man a uick, close inspection.  Then he
literally umped for the doorhe was out of it and running up the
stairs before the train had come to a definite stop."

"You can describe him, Mr. etherwick" suggested the inspector.

"escribe himyes.  nd identify him, too," asserted etherwick.  "e
was a man of certain notable features.   should know him again,
anywhere."

"ell, we'll have to look for him," said Matherfield.  "nd now we'll
have to take this dead man to the mortuary and have a thorough
examination and see what he's got on him.  You'd better come, Mr.
etherwickin fact,  shall want you."

etherwick wentin the tail of a sombre procession, himself and the
two medical men walking together.  e had to tell his tale again, to
the police surgeon that functionary, like all the rest who had heard
the story, shook his head ominously over the disappearance of the
sallowfaced man.

"ll an excuse, that," he said.  "There's no doctor close by.  You
didn't get any ideafrom their conversation,  meanof the dead man's
identity  ny name mentioned"

" heard no name mentioned," answered etherwick.  "They didn't address
each other by name.  've no idea who the man is."

That was what he wanted to know.  omewhere, of course, this dead man
had friends.  e had spoken of his hotelthere, perhaps, somebody was
awaiting his coming somebody to whom the news of his death would come
as a great shock, perhaps, and terrible trouble.  nd he waited with a
feeling that was little short of personal anxiety while the police
searched the dead man's pockets.

The various articles which were presently laid out on a sidetable were
many.  There was a purse, well stocked with money there was loose
money in the pockets.  There was a handsome gold watch and a heavy
chain and locket.  There was a pocketbook, stuffed with letters and
papers.  nd there were all the things that a wellprovided man
carriesa cigarcase, a silver matchbox, a silver pencilcase, a
penknife, and so on clearly, the dead man had been in comfortable
circumstances.  ut the articles of value were brushed aside by the
inspector his immediate concern was with the contents of the
pocketbook, from which he hastened to take out the letters.   second
later he turned to etherwick and the two doctors, nodding his head
sidewise at the still figure on the table.

"This'll be the name and address," he said, pointing to the envelopes
in his hand.  "Mr. obert annaford, Malter's rivate otel, urrey
treet, trand.  everal letters, you see, addressed there, and all of
recent date.  e'll have to go therethere may be his wife and people
of his there.  onder who he wassomebody from the provinces, most
likely.  ell"

e laid down the letters and picked up the watcha fine goldcased
hunterand released the back.  ithin that was an inscription,
engraved in delicate lettering.  The inspector let out an exclamation.

"h" he said.  " half suspected that from his appearance.  ne of
ourselves  Look at this'resented to uperintendent obert
annaford, on his retirement, by the Magistrates of ellithwaite.'
ellithwaite, ehwhere's that, now"

"Yorkshire," replied one of the men standing close by.  "outhest
iding."

Matherfield closed the watch and laid it by.

"ell," he remarked, "that's evidently who he isexuperintendent
annaford, of ellithwaite, Yorkshire, stopping at Malter's otel.
'll have to go round there.  Mr. etherwick, as you were the last man
to see him alive,  wish you'd go with meit's on your way to the
Temple."

omething closely corresponding to curiosity, not morbid, but
compelling, made etherwick accede to this reuest.  resently he and
Matherfield walked along the mbankment together, talking of what had
ust happened and speculating on the cause of annaford's sudden death.

"e may know the exact reason by noon," remarked Matherfield.
"There'll be a postmortem, of course.  ut that other manwe may get
to know something about him here.  nd  wonder whom we shall find
here  ope it's not his wife...."




T 

 TT  T

Malter himself opened the door of his small private hotel a uiet,
reserved man who looked like a retired butler.  e was the sort of man
who is slow of speech, and he had not replied to Matherfield's guarded
inuiry about Mr. obert annaford when a door in the little hall
opened, and a girl appeared, who, hearing the inspector's uestion,
immediately came forward as if in answer.

etherwick recognised this girl.  e had seen her only the previous
afternoon in ountain ourt, in company with a man whom he knew
slightlyenthwaite, a fellowbarrister.  enthwaite, evidently, was
doing the honoursshowing her round the Temple etherwick, in fact,
in passing them, had overheard enthwaite telling his companion
something of the history of the old houses and courts around them.  nd
the girl had attracted him then.  he was a pretty girl, tall, slim,
graceful, and in addition to her undoubted charm of face and figure,
she looked to have more than an average share of character and
intelligence, and was listening to her guide with obvious interest and
appreciation.  etherwick had set her down as being, perhaps, a country
cousin of enthwaite's, visiting London, maybe, for the first time.
nyhow, in merely passing her and enthwaite he had noticed her so
closely that he now recognised her at once he saw, too, that she
recognised him.  ut there was another matter more pressing than
thatand she had gone straight to it.

"re these gentlemen asking for my grandfather" she inuired, coming
still nearer and glancing from the hotel proprietor to the two callers.
"e's not come in"

etherwick was glad to hear that the dead man was the girl's
grandfather.  ertainly it was a close relationship, but, after all,
not so close as it might have been.  nd he was conscious that the
inspector was relieved, too.

"e're asking about Mr. obert annaford," he said.  "s he your
grandfatherexuperintendent annaford, of ellithwaite  ust
sowell, 'm very sorry to bring bad news about him"

e broke off, watching the girl keenly, as if he wanted to make sure
that she would take the news uietly.  nd evidently reassured on that
point, he suddenly went on definitely

"You'll understand" he said.  "t'swell, the worst news.  The fact
is"

"s my grandfather dead" interrupted the girl.  "f that's it, please
say so shan't faint, or anything of that sort.  ut want to know"

"'m sorry to say he is dead," replied Matherfield.  "e died suddenly
in the train at haring ross.   seiure, no doubt.  as he well when
you saw him last"

The girl turned to the hotel proprietor, who was standing by, evidently
amaed.

"ever saw a gentleman look better or seem better in my life than he
did when he went out of that door at halfpast six o'clock" he
exclaimed.  "est of health and spirits"

"My grandfather was uite well," said the girl uietly.  " never
remember him being anything else but wellhe was a very strong,
vigorous man.  ill you please tell me all about it"

Matherfield told all about it, turning now and then to etherwick for
corroboration.  n the end he put a uestion.

"This man that Mr. etherwick saw in your grandfather's company" he
suggested.  "o you recognise anyone from that description"

"ono one," answered the girl.  "ut my grandfather knew people in
London whom  don't know.  e has been going about a good deal since we
came here, three days agolooking out for a house."

"ell, we shall have to find that man," remarked Matherfield.  "f
course, if you'd recognised the description as that of somebody known
to you"

"o," she said again.  " know nobody like that.  ut nowdo you wish
me to go with youto him"

"t's not necessary wouldn't tonight, if  were you," replied
Matherfield.  "'ll call again in the morning.  Meanwhile, leave
matters to us and the doctors.  You've friends in London,  suppose"

"Yes, we have friendsrelations, in fact," said the girl.  " must let
them know at once."

Matherfield nodded and turned to the door.  ut etherwick lingered.
e and the girl were looking at each other.  e suddenly spoke.

" saw you this afternoon," he said, "in ountain ourt, with a man
whom  know slightly, Mr. enthwaite.  s he, by any chance, one of the
relations you mentioned ust now  ecause, if so, he lives close by
me.   can tell him, if you wish."

"o," she answered, "not a relative.  e know him.  You might tell him,
if you please, and if it's no trouble."

"o trouble at all," said etherwick.  "ndif  may hope you'll
let me call in the morning to hear if there's anything  can do for
you"

The girl gave him a uick, responsive glance.

"That's very kind of you," she said.  "Yes."

etherwick and the police inspector left the little hotel and walked up
the street.  Matherfield seemed to be in a brown study.  omewhere up
in the trand and farther away down leet treet the clocks began
striking.

"eems to me," exclaimed Matherfield suddenly, "seems to me, Mr.
etherwick, this ismurder"

"You mean poison" said etherwick.

"Likely  hy, yes, of course, it would be poison.  e must have that
man  You can't add to your description of him"

"You've already got everything that  can tell.  retty full and
accurate, too.   should say you oughtn't to have much difficulty in
laying hands on himfrom my description."

Matherfield made a sound that was half a laugh and half a groan.

"Lord bless you" he said.  "t's like seeking a needle in a bundle of
hay, searching for a given man in London   mean, of course,
sometimes.  More often than not, in fact.  ere's this chap rushes up
the stairs at haring ross, vanisheswhere  ne man amongst seven
millions of men and women  owever"

Then they parted, and etherwick, full of thought, went home to his
chambers and to bed, and lay eually thoughtful for a long time before
he went to sleep.  e made a poor night of it, but soon after eight
o'clock he was in enthwaite's chambers.  enthwaite was dressing and
breakfasting at the same timea readypacked brief bag and an open
timetable suggested that he was in a hurry to catch a train.  ut he
suspended his operations to stare, openmouthed, wideeyed at
etherwick's news.

"annaforddead" he exclaimed.  "reat cottwhy, he was as fit as
a fiddle at noon yesterday, etherwick  e and his grand daughter
called on me, and  took 'em to lunch come from ellithwaite, you
know, so of course  knew them.  annaford had to go as soon as we'd
lunchedsome appointmentso  showed the girl round a bit.  ice
girl, thatclever.  ame of hona.  orth cultivating.  nd the old
man's dead  less me"

" don't think there's much doubt about foul play," observed etherwick.

"Looks uncommonly like it," said enthwaite.  e went on with his
double task.  "ell," he added, "sorry, but  can't be of any use to
Miss annaford todaygot to go down to a beastly uarter essions
case, my boy, and precious little time to catch my train.  ut
tomorrowperhaps you can give 'm a hand this morning"

"Yes," answered etherwick.  "'m doing nothing.  'll go round there
after a while.  'm interested naturally.  t's a ueer case."

"ueer  eems so, rather," assented enthwaite.  "ellgive Miss
annaford my sympathy and all that, and tell her that if there's
anything  can do when  get backyou know what to say."

"he said she'd relations here in London," remarked etherwick.

"ousinsauntssomething or otherover Tooting way,  think," agreed
enthwaite.  "Twenty past eightetherwick, 'll have to rush for it"

e swallowed the last of his coffee, seied the bag and darted away
etherwick went back to his own chambers and breakfasted leisurely.
nd all the time he sat there he was pondering over the event of the
previous midnight, and especially upon the sudden disappearance of the
man with the stained fingers.  To etherwick that disappearance seemed
to argue guilt.  e figured it in this waythe man who ran away at
haring ross had poisoned this other man in some clever and subtle
fashion, by means of something which took a certain time to take
effect, and, when that time arrived, did its work with amaing
swiftness.  etherwick, in his war service, had seen men die more times
than he cared to remember.  e had seen some men shot through the
brain he had seen others shot through the heart.  ut he had never
seen any of these mensome of them shot at his very sidedie with the
extraordinary uickness with which annaford had died.  nd he came to
a conclusion if the man with the stained fingers had poisoned
annaford, then he was somebody who had a rare and a profound knowledge
of poisons.

e went round to urrey treet at ten o'clock.  Miss annaford, said
the hotel proprietor, had gone with her aunt, a Mrs. eeley, who had
come early that morning, to see her grandfather's dead bodysome
police official had fetched them.  ut she had left a message for
anyone who calledthat she would not be long away.  nd etherwick
waited in the little dingy coffeeroom there were certain uestions
that he wanted to put to hona annaford, also he wanted to give her
certain information.

"ery sad case this, sir," observed the hotel proprietor, hovering
about his breakfasttables.  "ruel end for a fine healthy gentleman
like Mr. annaford"

"ery sad," agreed etherwick.  "You said last nightor, rather, this
morningthat Mr. annaford was in good health and spirits when he went
out early in the evening"

"The best, sir  e was a cheery, affable gentlemanfond of his oke.
oked and laughed with me as  opened the door for himnever thinking,
sir, as  should never see him again alive"

"You don't know where he was going"

" don't, sir.  nd his granddaughterclever young lady, that,
sirshe don't know, neither.  he went to a theatre, along of her
aunt, the lady that came early this morning.  e wired the bad news to
her first thing, and she came along at once.  ut himno,  don't know
where he went to spend his evening.  een in and out, and mostly out,
ever since they were here, three days ago.  ousehunting, so 
understood."

hona annaford presently returned, in company with a motherlylooking
woman whom she introduced as her aunt, Mrs. eeley.  Then etherwick
remembered that he had not introduced himself rectifying that
omission, he found that enthwaite had told hona who he was when he
passed them the previous afternoon.  e delivered enthwaite's message
and in his absence offered his own services.

"t's very good of you," said hona.  " don't know that there's
anything to do.  The police seem to be doing everythingthe inspector
who was here last night was very kind ust now, but, as he said,
there's nothing to be done until after the inuest."

"Yes," said etherwick.  "nd that isdid he say when"

"Tomorrow morning.  e said  should have to go," replied hona.

"o shall ," observed etherwick.  "They'll only want formal evidence
from you.   shall have to say more.   wish  could say more than 
shall have to say."

The two women glanced at him inuiringly.

" mean," he continued, "that  wish  had stopped the other man from
leaving the train.   suppose you have not heard anything from the
police about himthat man"

"othing.  They had not found him or heard of him up to ust now.  ut
you can tell me something that  very much want to know.  You saw this
man with my grandfather for some little time, didn't you"

"rom t. ames's ark to haring ross."

"id you overhear their conversation, or any of it"

" good dealat first.  fterwards, your grandfather began to whisper,
and  heard nothing of that.  ut one reason  had for calling upon you
this morning was that  might tell you what  did overhear, and another
that  might ask you some uestions arising out of what  heard.  Mr.
annaford was talking to this man, now missing, about some portrait or
photograph.  vidently it was of a lady whom he, your grandfather, had
known ten years ago whom the other man had also known.  Your
grandfather said that when they got to his hotel he would show the
portrait to the other man who, he asserted, would be sure to recognise
it.  ow, had Mr. annaford said anything to you  o you know anything
about his bringing any friend of his to this hotel last night  nd do
you know anything about any portrait or photograph such as that to
which he referred"

"bout bringing anyone hereno  e never said anything to me about
it.  ut about a photograph, or rather about a print of oneyes.   do
know something about that."

"hat" asked etherwick eagerly.

"ell, this," she answered.  "My grandfather, who, as  dare say you
know by this time, was for a good many years uperintendent of olice
at ellithwaite, had a habit of cutting things out of
newspapersparagraphs, accounts of criminal trials, and so on.  e had
several boxes full of such cuttings.  hen we were coming to town the
other day  saw him cut a photograph out of some illustrated paper he
was reading in the train, and put it away in his pocketbookin a
pocketbook,  ought to say, for he had two or three pocketbooks.
This morning  was looking through various things which he had left
lying about on his dressingtable upstairs, and in one of his
pocketbooks  found the photograph which he cut out in the train.
That must be the one you mentionit's of a very handsome,
distinguishedlooking woman."

"f  may see it" suggested etherwick.

ithin a couple of minutes he had the cutting in his handa scrap of
paper, neatly snipped out of its surrounding letterpress, which was a
print of a photograph of a woman of apparently thirtyfive to forty
years of age, evidently of high position, and certainly, as hona
annaford had remarked, of handsome and distinguished features.  ut it
was not at the photograph that etherwick gaed with eyes into which
surmise and speculation were beginning to steal after a mere glance at
it, his attention fixed itself on some pencilled words on the margin at
its sides

"Through my hands ten years ago"


"s that your grandfather's writing" he inuired suddenly.

"Yes, that's his," replied hona.  "e had a habit of pencilling notes
and comments on his cuttingsall sorts of remarks."

"e didn't mention this particular cutting to you when he cut it out"

"ohe said nothing about it.   saw him cut it out, and heard him
chuckle as he put it away, but he saidnothing."

"You don't know who this lady is"

"h, no  You see, there's no name beneath it.   suppose there was in
the paper, but he cut out nothing but the picture and the bit of
margin.  ut from what he's written there,  conclude that this is a
portrait of some woman who had been in trouble with the police at some
time or other."

"bvious" muttered etherwick.  e sat silently inspecting the picture
for a minute or two.

"Look here," he said suddenly, " want you to let me help in trying to
get at the bottom of thisnaturally you want to have it cleared up.
nd to begin with, let me have this cutting, and for the present don't
tell anyone mean the police or any inuirersthat  have it.  'd
like to have a talk about it to enthwaite.  You understand  s  was
present at your grandfather's death, 'd like to solve the mystery of
it.  f you'll leave this to me"

"h, yes" replied hona.  "utyou think there has been foul
playthat he didn't die a natural deaththat it wasn't ust heart
failure or"

The door of the little coffeeroom was opened and Matherfield looked
in.  eeing etherwick there, he beckoned him into the hall, closing
the door again as the young barrister oined him.  etherwick saw that
he was full of news, and instantly thought of the man with the stained
fingers.

"ell" he said eagerly, "laid your hands on that fellow"

"h, himno" answered Matherfield.  "ot a word or sign of himso
far  ut the doctors have finished their postmortem.  nd there's no
doubt about their verdict.  oisoned"

Matherfield sank his voice to a whisper as he spoke the last word.  nd
etherwick, ready though he was for the news, started when he got
itthe definiteness of the announcement seemed like opening a window
upon a vista of obscured and misty distances.  e glanced at the door
behind him.

"f course, they'll have to be told, in there," said Matherfield,
interpreting his thoughts.  "ut the thing's certain.  ur surgeon
suspected it from the first, and he got a ome ffice specialist to
help at the autopsythey say the man was poisoned by some drug or
other don't understand these thingsthat had been administered to
him two or three hours before he died, and that when it did work,
worked with absolutely lightninglike effect."

"Yes," muttered etherwick thoughtfully.  "Lightninglike effectgood
phrase.   can testify that it did that"

Matherfield laid a hand on the door.

"ell," he said, "'d better tell these ladies.  Thenthere are things
 want to know from the granddaughter.  've seen herand her
auntbefore this morning.   found out that annaford brought up and
educated this girl, and that she lived with him in ellithwaite since
she left school, so she'll know more about him than anybody.  nd 
want to learn all  can.  ome in with me."




T 

T TTL T

lder and younger woman alike took Matherfield's intimation uietly.
hona made no remark.  ut Mrs. eeley spoke impulsively.

"There never was a more popular man than he waswith everybody" she
exclaimed.  "ho should want to take his life"

"That's ust what we've got to find out, ma'am," said Matherfield.
"nd  want to know as much as  can dare say Miss annaford can
tell me a lot.  ow, let's see what we do know from what you told me
this morning.  Mr. annaford had been uperintendent of olice at
ellithwaite for some years.  e had recently retired on his pension.
e proposed to live in London, and you and he, Miss annaford, came to
London to look for a suitable house, arrived three days ago, and put up
at this hotel.  That's all correct  ery goodnow then, let me hear
all about his movements during the last three days.  hat did he do
here did he spend his time"

" can't tell you much," answered hona.  "e was out most of the day,
and generally by himself.   was only out with him twiceonce when we
went to do some shopping, another time when we called on Mr. enthwaite
at his rooms in the Temple.   understood he was looking for a
houseseeing house agents and so on.  e was out morning, afternoon
and evening."

"id he never tell you anything about where he'd been, or whom he'd
seen"

"o.  e was the sort of man who keeps things to himself.   have no
idea where he went nor whom he saw."

"idn't say anything about where he was going last night"

"o.  e only said that he was going out and that  should find him
here when  got back from the theatre, to which  was going with Mrs.
eeley.  e got back here soon after eleven.  ut he hadn't come inas
you know."

"You never heard him speak of having enemies"

" should think he hadn't an enemy in the world  e was a very kind
man and very popular, even with the people he had to deal with as a
policesuperintendent."

"nd  suppose he'd no financial worriesanything of that sort  or
any other troublesnothing to bother him"

" don't think he'd a care in the world," said hona confidently.  "e
was looking forward with real est to settling down in London.  nd as
to financial worries, he'd none.  e was well off."

"lways a saving, careful man," remarked Mrs. eeley.  "h, yes, uite
well offapart from his pension."

Matherfield glanced at etherwick, who had listened carefully to all
that was asked and answered.  omething in the glance seemed to invite
him to take a hand.

"This occurs to me," said etherwick.  e turned to hona.  "part from
this househunting, do you know whether your grandfather had any
business affair in hand in London  hat 'm thinking of is thisfrom
what  saw of him in the train, he appeared to be an active, energetic
man, not the sort of man who, because he'd retired, would sit down in
absolute idleness.  o you know of anything that he thought of
undertakingany business he thought of oining"

hona considered this uestion for a while.

"ot any business," she replied at last.  "ut there is something that
may have to do with what you suggest.  My grandfather had a hobby.  e
experimented in his spare time."

"hat in" asked etherwick.  Then he suddenly remembered the stained
fingers that he had noticed on the hands of both men the night before.
"as it chemicals" he added uickly.

"Yes, in chemicals," she answered with a look of surprise.  "ow did
you know that"

" noticed that his hands and fingers were stained," replied
etherwick.  "o were those of the man he was with.  ellbut this
something"

"e had a little laboratory in our garden at ellithwaite," she
continued.  "e spent all his spare time in ithe'd done that for
years.  Lately,  know, he'd been trying to invent or discover
something don't know what.  ut ust before we left ellithwaite, he
told me that he'd solved the problem, and when he was sorting out and
packing up his papers he showed me a sealed envelope in which he said
were the particulars of his big discoveryhe said there was a
potential fortune in it and that he should die a rich man.   saw him
put that envelope in a pocketbook which he always carried with him."

"That would be the pocketbook  examined last night," said
Matherfield.  "There was no sealed envelope, nor one of which any seal
had been broken, in that.  There was nothing but letters, receipts and
unimportant papers."

"t is not in his other pocketbooks," declared hona.  " went through
all his things myself very early this morningthrough everything that
he had here.   know that he had that envelope yesterdayhe pulled out
some things from his pocket when we were lunching with Mr. enthwaite
in a restaurant in leet treet, and  saw the envelope.  t was a
stout, suare envelope, across the front of which he had drawn two
thick red lines, and it was heavily sealed with black sealingwax at
the back."

"That was yesterday, you say" asked Matherfield sharply.  "Yesterday
noon  ust so  Then as he had it yesterday at noon, and as it wasn't
in his pockets last night and is not among his effects in this house,
it's very clear that between, say, two o'clock yesterday and midnight
he parted with it.  ow then, to whom  That's a thing we've ust got
to find out  ut you're sure he wasn't oking when he told you that
this discovery, or invention, or whatever it was, was worth a potential
fortune"

"n the contrary, he was very serious," replied hona.  "nusually
serious for him.  e wouldn't tell me what it was, nor give me any
particularsall he said was that he'd solved a problem and hit on a
discovery that he'd worked over for years, and that the secret was in
that envelope and worth no end of money.   asked him what he meant by
no end of money and he said 'ell, at any rate, a hundred thousand
poundsin time.'"

The two men exchanged glances silence fell on the whole group.

"h" said Matherfield at last.  " secret worth a hundred thousand
poundsin time.  This will have to be looked intonarrowly.  hat do
you think, Mr. etherwick"

"Yes," answered etherwick.  "You've no idea, of course, as to whether
your grandfather had done anything about putting this discovery on the
marketor made any arrangement about selling it  o  ell, can you
tell me this hat sort of house did your grandfather want to rent here
in London   mean, do you know what rent he was prepared to pay"

" can answer that," remarked Mrs. eeley.  "e told me he wanted a
good housea real good onein a convenient suburb, and he was willing
to go up to three hundred a year."

"Three hundred a year," said etherwick.  e exchanged a meaning glance
with Matherfield.  "That," he added, "looks as if he felt assured of a
considerable income, and as though he had already realised on his
discovery or was very certain of doing so."

"To be sure," agreed Matherfield.  "f course,  don't know what his
private means were, but  know what his retiring pension would beand
three hundred a year for rent alone meansa good deal  mwe'll
have to endeavour to trace that sealed envelope."

"t seems to me, Matherfield," observed etherwick, "that the first
thing to do is to trace annaford's movements last night, from the time
he left this hotel until his death in the train."

"e're at that already," replied Matherfield.  "e've a small army of
men at work.  ut as we want all the help we can get, 'm going to stir
up the newspaper men, Mr. etherwickthe ress, sir, is always
valuable in this sort of thingand  want Miss annaford, if she's
got one, to give me a recent photograph of her grandfather so that it
can appear in the papers.  omebody, you know, may recognise
itsomebody who saw him last night with somebody else."

hona had a new photograph of the dead man, taken in plain clothes ust
before he left ellithwaite, and she gave Matherfield some copies of
it.  eproductions appeared in the Meteor and other evening papers
that night, and in some of the dailies next morning.  nd, as a result,
a man came forward at the inuest, a few hours later, who declared with
positive assurance that he had seen annaford early in the evening of
the murder.  is appearance was the only sensational thing about these
necessarily only preliminary proceedings before the coroner until he
stepped forward nothing had transpired with which etherwick was not
already familiar.  There had been his own evidence somewhat to his
surprise neither coroner nor police seemed to pay much attention to his
account of the conversation about the woman's portrait they appeared
to regard annaford's observations as a bit of garrulous reminiscence
about some criminal or other.  There had been hona'sa repetition of
what she had told Matherfield and etherwick at Malter's otel police
and coroner evidently fixed on the missing sealed envelope and its
mysterious secret as a highly important factor in the case.  Then there
had been the expert testimony of the two doctors as to the cause of
deaththat had been confined to positive declarations that annaford
died from the administration of some subtle poison, the exact details
being left over until experts could tell more at the adourned
proceedings.  nd the coroner was about to adourn for a fortnight when
a man, who had entered the court and been in conversation with the
officials, was put into the witnessbox to tell a story which certainly
added information and, at the same time, accentuated mystery.

This man was a highlyrespectable person in appearance, middleaged,
giving the name of Martin harles Ledbitter, manager of an insurance
office in estminster, and residing at utton, in urrey.  t was his
habit, he said, to travel every evening from ictoria to utton by the
. train.  s a rule he arrived at ictoria ust before seven and
took a cup of tea in the refreshmentroom.  e did this on the night
before last.  hile he was drinking his tea at the counter, an elderly
man came in and stood by him, whom he was sure beyond doubt was the
same man whose photograph was reproduced in some of last night's and
some of this morning's newspapers.  e had no doubt whatever about
this.  e first noticed the man's stained fingers as he took up the
glass of whiskyandsoda which he had ordered he had, at the time,
wondered at the contrast between those fingers and the general
spickandspanness of the man and his smart attire also he had noticed
his goldheaded walkingcane and that the head was fashioned like a
crown.  They stood side by side for some minutes, then the man went
out.   minute or two later he saw him againthis time at the
righthand side bookstall he was there obviously looking out for
somebody.

This was the point where the interest really began everybody in court
strained eyes and ears as the coroner put a direct uestion.

"Looking out for somebody  id you see him meet anybody"

" did"

"Tell me what you saw."

" saw this.  hen  approached the bookstall, to buy some evening
papers, the man whom  had seen in the refreshmentroom was standing
close by.  e was looking about him, but chiefly at the entrances to
the big space between the offices and the platforms.  nce or twice he
looked at his watch.  t was thenby the station clockabout ten
minutes past seven.  e seemed impatient he moved restlessly about.  
passed him and went to the bookstall.  hen  turned round again he was
standing a few yards away, shaking hands with another man.  rom the
way in which they shook hands,  concluded that they were old friends,
who perhaps had not seen each other for some time."

"Their greeting was cordial"

" should call it effusive."

"an you describe the other man"

" can describe a sort of general impression of both.  e was a tall
man, taller than annaford, but not so broadly built.  e wore a dark
ulster overcoat, with a strap at the back it was either a very dark
blue or a black in colour.  e had a silk hatnew and glossy.  e gave
me the impression of being a smartlydressed mansmart boots and
gloves and that sort of thingyou know the general impression you get
at a uick glance.  ut as to his features,  can't tell you anything."

"hy not" asked the coroner.

"ecause, to begin with, he wore an unusually large pair of blue
spectacles, which completely veiled his eyes, and to end with, his
throat and chin were swathed in a heavy white muffler, which covered
the lower part of his face as well.  etween the rim of his hat and the
collar of his coat it was all muffler and spectacles"

The coroner looked disappointed.  is interest in the witness seemed to
evaporate.

"id you notice anything else" he asked.

"nly that the newcomer took annaford's arm and that they walked away
towards the lefthand entrance hall, evidently in earnest conversation.
That was the last  saw of them."

"There's ust one uestion  should like to put to you in conclusion,"
said the coroner.  "You say that you are confident that the photograph
in the newspapers is that of the man you saw at ictoria.  ow, have
you seen the dead man's body"

" have.  The police took me to see it when  volunteered my evidence."

"nd you recognised it as that of the man you saw"

"ithout doubt  There is no uestion of that in my mind."

ive minutes later the inuest stood adourned, and those chiefly
concerned gathered together in the emptying court to discuss the
voluntary witness's evidence.  Matherfield manifested an almost
cheerful optimism.

"This is bettermuch better," he declared, rubbing his hands as if in
anticipation of laying them on something.  "e know now that annaford
met, at any rate, two men that night.  t's easier to find two men than
one"

hona, whom etherwick had escorted to the coroner's court, looked her
astonishment.  "ow can that be" she asked.

"Mr. etherwick understands," answered Matherfield with a laugh.
"e'll tell you."

ut etherwick said nothing.  e was always wonderingalways
wonderingabout the woman whose picture lay in his pocket.




T 

T M L

The conviction that there was more than met the eye in annaford's
cutting out and putting away the handsome and distinguished woman's
photograph grew mightily in etherwick's mind during the next few days.
e recalled all that annaford had said about it in the train in those
few short minutes before his sudden death.  hy had he been so keen
about showing it to the other man  as he taking the other man
specially to his hotel to show it to himat that time of night  hy
did the recollections which his possession of it brought up afford
himobviouslyso much interest and, it seemed, amusement  nd what,
exactly, was meant by the pencilled words in the margin of the
cuttingThrough my hands ten years ago  nder what circumstances
had this woman been through annaford's hands  nd who was she  The
more he thought of it, the more etherwick was convinced that there was
more importance in this matter than the police attached to it.  They
had proved utterly indifferent to etherwick's account of the
conversation in the trainthat, said Matherfield, with official
superiority, was nothing but a bit of chat, reminiscence, recollection,
on the exsuperintendent's part old men, he said, were fond of talking
about incidents of the past.  The only significance Matherfield saw in
it was that it seemed to argue that whoever the man who had disappeared
was, he and annaford had known each other ten years ago.

t the end of a week the police had heard nothing of this man.  or had
they made any discovery in respect of the other man whom Ledbitter
swore he had seen with annaford at ictoria.  The best cotland Yard
hands had been hard and continuously at work, and had brought nothing
to light.  nly one person had seen the first man after he darted up
the stairs of haring ross calling out that he was going for a doctor
this was a policeman on duty at the front of the nderground tation.
e had seen the man run out had watched him run at top speed up
illiers treet, and had thought no more of it than that he was some
belated passenger hurrying to catch a last bus in the trand.  ut with
that, all news and trace of him vanished.  f the tall man in the big
blue spectacles and white muffler there never was any trace, nor any
news beyond Ledbitter's.  Yet Ledbitter was a thoroughly dependable
witness, and there was no doubt that he had seen annaford in this
man's company.  o, without uestion, annaford, during his last few
hours of life, had been with two menneither of whom could be found.
ithin twentyfour hours of his death several men came forward
voluntarily who had had dealings or conversation with annaford since
his arrival in London.  ut there was a significant fact about the news
which any of them could givenot one knew anything of the tall man
seen by Ledbitter, or of the shabby man seen by etherwick, or of the
secret which annaford carried in his sealed packet.  The story of that
sealed packet had been told plentifully in the newspapersbut nobody
came forward who knew anything about it.  nd when a week had elapsed
after the exuperintendent's burial, the whole mystery of his
undoubted murder seemed likely to become one of the many which are
never solved.

ut etherwick was becoming absorbed in this affair into which he had
been so curiously thrown headfirst.  e had leisure on his hands
also, he was well off in this world's goods, and much more concerned
with the psychology of his profession than with a desire to earn money
by its practice.  rom the moment in which he heard that the doctors
had found that annaford had been poisoned, he felt that here was a
murder mystery at the bottom of which he must getit fascinated him.
nd all through his speculations and theorisings about it, he was
obsessed by the picture in his pocket.  ho was that womanand what
did the dead man remember about her

uddenly, one morning, after a visit from Matherfield, who looked in at
his chambers casually, to tell him that the police had discovered
nothing, etherwick put on his hat and went round to urrey treet.  e
found hona annaford busy in preparing to leave Malter's otel she was
going to live, for a time at any rate, with Mrs. eeley.  etherwick
went straight to the matter that had brought him.

"That print of a woman's photograph which your grandfather had in his
pocketbook," he said, "and that's now in mine.  ut of what paper did
he cut ita newspaper, evidently."

"Yes, but  don't know what paper," answered hona.  "ll  know is
that it was a paper which he got by post, the morning that he left
ellithwaite.  e were ust leaving for the station when the post came.
e put his letters and papersthere were several thingsin his
overcoat pocket, and opened them in the train.  t was somewhere on the
way to London that he cut out that picture.  e threw the paper
awaywith others.  e had a habit of buying a lot of papers, and used
to cut out paragraphs."

"ell suppose it can be traced," muttered etherwick, thinking
aloud.  e glanced at the evidences of hona's departure.  "o you're
going to live with your aunt" he said.

"or a timeyes," she answered.

" hope you'll let me call" suggested etherwick.  "'m awfully
interested in this affair, and  may be able to tell you something
about it."

"e'd be pleased," she replied.  "'ll give you the address.   don't
intend to be idle thoughunless you call in the evening, you'll
probably find me out."

"hat are you thinking of doing" he asked.

" think of going in for secretarial work," she answered.  "s a matter
of fact,  had a training for that, in ellithwaite.  Typewriting,
correspondence, accounts, rench, erman'm pretty well euipped."

"on't think me inuisitive," said etherwick, suddenly.  " hope your
grandfather hasn't forgotten you in his will heard he'd left one"

"Thank you," replied hona.  "e hasn't.  e left me everything.  've
got about three hundred a yearrather more.  ut that's no reason why
 should sit down, and do nothing, is it"

"ood" said etherwick.  "utif that sealed packet could be found
hat was worth a hundred thousand to him, would be worth a hundred
thousand to his sole legatee.  orth finding"

" wonder if anything will be found" she answered.  "The whole thing's
a mystery that 'm not even on the edge of solving."

"Time" said etherwick.  "ndpatience."

e went away presently, and strolled round to rick ourt, where
enthwaite had his chambers.

"oing anything" he asked, as he walked in.

"othing," replied enthwaite.  "o ahead"

etherwick sat down, and lighted his pipe.

"You know ellithwaite, don't you" he asked when he had got his
tobacco well going.  "Your town, eh"

"orn and bred there, and engaged to a girl there," replied enthwaite.
"ught to  hat about ellithwaite"

"ere you there ten years ago" demanded etherwick.

"Ten years ago  oexcept in the holidays.   was at school ten years
ago.  hy"

"o you remember any police case at ellithwaite about that time in
which a very handsome woman was concernedprobably as defendant"

"o  ut  was more interested in cricket than in crime, in those
days.  re you thinking about the woman annaford spoke of in the train
to the chap they can't come across"

" am  eems to me there's more in that than the police think."

"houldn't wonder.  Let's see annaford spoke of that woman aswhat"

"aid she'd been through his hands, ten years ago."

"ell, that's easy  f she was through annaford's hands, as
uperintendent of olice, ten years ago, that would be at ellithwaite.
nd there'll be records, particulars, and so on at ellithwaite."

etherwick nodded, and smoked in silence for awhile.

"Think  shall go down there," he said at last.

enthwaite stared, wonderingly.

"een as all that" he exclaimed.

"ueer business" said etherwick.  "Like to solve it."

"h, well, it's only a four hours' run from ing's ross," observed
enthwaite.  "nteresting town, too.  ld as the hills and modern as
they make 'em.  xcellent hotel'hite ear.'  nd 'll tell you what,
my future's brother is a solicitor thereMichael ollis.  'll give
you a letter of introduction to him, and he'll show you round and give
you any help you need."

"ood man" said etherwick.  "rite it"

enthwaite sat down and wrote, and handed over the result.

"hat do you want to find out, exactly" he asked, as etherwick
thanked him, and rose to go.

"ll about the woman, and why annaford cut her picture out of the
paper," answered etherwick.  "ellsee you when  get back."

e went off to his own chambers, packed a bag, and drove to ing's
ross to catch the early afternoon train for the orth.  t halfpast
seven that evening he found himself in ellithwaite, a grey,
smokeladen town set in the midst of bleak and rugged hills, where the
folkif the railway officials were anything to go byspoke a dialect
which, to etherwick's southern ears, sounded like some barbaric
language.  ut the "hite ear," in which he was presently installed,
yielded all the comforts and luxuries of a firstclass hotel the
diningroom, into which etherwick turned as soon as he had booked his
room, seemed to be thronged by a thoroughly cosmopolitan crowd of men
he heard most of the principal uropean languages being spokenlater,
he found that his fellowguests were principally ontinental business
men, buyers, intent on replenishing exhausted stocks from the great
warehouses and manufactories of ellithwaite.  ll this was
interesting, nor was he destined to spend the remainder of his evening
in contemplating it from a solitary corner, for he had scarcely eaten
his dinner when a hallporter came to tell him that Mr. ollis was
asking for Mr. etherwick.

etherwick hastened into the lounge, and found a keenfaced,
friendlyeyed man of forty or thereabouts stretching out a hand to him.

"enthwaite wired me this afternoon that you were coming down, and
asked me to look you up here," he said.  "'d have asked you to dine
with me, but 've been kept at my office until ust now, and again, 
live a good many miles out of town.  ut tomorrow night"

"You're awfully good," replied etherwick.  "'d no idea that
enthwaite was wiring.  e gave me a letter of introduction to you, but
 suppose he thought  wanted to lose no time.  nd  don't, and  dare
say you can tell me something about the obect of my visitlet's find
a corner and smoke."

nstalled in an alcove in the big smokingroom, ollis read
enthwaite's letter.

"hat is it you're after" he asked.  "enthwaite mentions that my
knowledge of ellithwaite is deeper than his ownnaturally, it is, as
'm several years older."

"ell," responded etherwick.  "t's this, briefly.  You're aware, of
course, of what befell your late oliceuperintendent in Londonhis
sudden death"

"h, yesread all the newspapers, anyway," assented ollis.  "You're
the man who was present in the train on the nderground, aren't you"

" am.  nd that's one reason why 'm keen on solving the mystery.
There's no doubt whatever that annaford was poisonedthat it's a case
of deliberate murder.  ow, there's a feature of the case to which the
police don't seem to attach any importance.   do attach great
importance to it.  t's the matter of the woman to whom annaford
referred when he was talkingin my presenceto the man who so
mysteriously disappeared.  annaford spoke of that woman as having been
through his hands ten years ago.  That would be some experience he had
here, in this town.  ow then, do you know anything about it  oes it
arouse any recollection"

ollis, who was smoking a cigar, thoughtfully tapped its long ash
against the edge of his coffeecup.  uddenly his eyes brightened.

"That's probably the hittingham case," he said.  "t was about ten
years ago."

"nd what was the hittingham case" asked etherwick.  "ase of a
woman"

"f a womanevidently an adventuresswho came to ellithwaite about
ten years ago, and stayed here some little time, in this very hotel,"
replied ollis.  "ddly enough,  never saw her  ut she was heard of
enougheventually.  he came here, to the 'hite ear,' alone, with
plenty of luggage and evident funds.   understand she was a very
handsome woman, twentyeight or thirty years of age, and she was taken
for somebody of conseuence.   rather think she described herself as
the onourable Mrs. hittingham.  he paid her bills here with
unfailing punctuality every aturday morning.  he spent a good deal of
money amongst the leading tradesmen in the town, and always paid cash.
n short, she established her credit very successfully.  nd with
nobody more so than the principal eweller hereMalladale.  he bought
a lot of ewellery from Malladalebut in his case, she always paid by
cheue.  nd in the end it was through a deal with Malladale that she
got into trouble."

"nd into annaford's hands" suggested etherwick.

"nto annaford's hands, certainly," assented ollis.  "t was this
way.  he had, as  said ust now, made a lot of purchases from
Malladale, who,  may tell you, has a firstclass trade amongst our
rich commercial magnates in this neighbourhood.  er transactions with
him, however, were never, at first, in amounts exceeding a hundred or
two.  ut they went through all right.  he used to pay him by cheue
drawn on a Manchester bankManchester, you know, is only thirtyfive
miles away.  s her first cheues were always met, Malladale never
bothered about making any inuiry about her financial stability like
everybody else he was very much impressed by her.  ell, in the end,
she'd a big deal with Malladale, Malladale had a very fine diamond
necklace in stock.  e and she used to discuss her acuisition of it
according to his story they had a fine old battle as to terms.
ventually, they struck a bargainhe let her have it for three
thousand nine hundred pounds.  he gave him a cheue for that amount
there and then, and he let her carry off the necklace."

"h" exclaimed etherwick.

"ust so" agreed ollis.  "uthe did.  owever, for some reason or
other, Malladale had that cheue specially cleared.  he handed it to
him on a Monday afternoon first thing on ednesday morning Malladale
found that it had been returned with the ominous reference to drawer
inscribed on its surface  aturally, he hurried round to the 'hite
ear.'  ut the onourable Mrs. hittingham had disappeared.  he had
paid up her account, taken her belongings, and left the hotel, and the
town, late on the Monday evening, and all that could be discovered at
the station was that she had travelled by the last train to Leeds,
where, of course, there are several big main lines to all parts of
ngland.  nd she had left no address she had, indeed, told the people
here that she should be back before long, and that if any letters came
they were to keep them until her return.  o then Malladale went to the
police, and annaford got busy."

" gather that he traced her" suggested etherwick.

ollis laughed sardonically.

"annaford traced herand he got her," he answered.  "ut he might
well use the expression that you mentioned ust now.  he was indeed
through his handsust as a particularly slippery eel might have
beenshe got clear away from him."




T 

T L T

etherwick now began to arrive at something like an understanding of a
matter that had puled him ever since and also at the time of the
conversation between annaford and his companion in the train.  e had
noted then that whatever it was that annaford was telling, he was
telling it as a man tells a story against himself there had been signs
of amused chagrin and discomfiture in his manner.  ow he saw why.

"h" he exclaimed.  "he was one too many for him.  Then"

" good many times too many" laughed ollis.  "he did annaford
completely.  e strove hard to find her, and did a great deal of the
spadework himself.  nd at last he ran her downin a fashionable
hotel in London.  e had a cotland Yard man with him, and a detective
from our own policeoffice here, a man named andham, who is still in
the force'll introduce you to him tomorrow.  annaford, finding
that Mrs. hittingham had a suite of rooms in this hotela big est
nd placeleft his two men downstairs, or outside, and went up to see
her alone.  ccording to his own account, she was highly indignant at
any suspicions being cast upon her, and still more so, rose to a pitch
of most virtuous indignation when he told her that he'd got a warrant
for her arrest and that she'd have to go with him.  uring a brief
interchange of remarks she declared that if her bankers at Manchester
had returned her cheue unpaid it must have been merely because they
hadn't realised certain valuable securities which she'd sent to them,
and that if Malladale had presented his cheue a few days later it
would have been all right.  ow, that was all boshannaford, of
course, had been in communication with the bankers all they knew of
the lady was that she had opened an account with them while staying at
some hotel in Manchester, and that she had drawn all but a few pounds
of her balance the very day on which she had got the necklace from
Malladale and fled with it from ellithwaite.  aturally, annaford
didn't tell her thishe merely reiterated his demand that she should
go with him.  he assented at once, only stipulating that there should
be no fussshe would walk out of the hotel with him, and he and his
satellites could come back and search her belongings at their leisure.
Then annafordwho, between you and me, etherwick, had an eye for a
pretty womanmade his mistake.  er bedroom opened out of the
sittingroom in which he'd had his interview with her he was fool
enough to let her go into it alone, to get ready to go with him.  he
wentand that was the very last annaford ever saw of her"

"Made a lightning exit, eh" remarked etherwick.

"he must have gone instantly," asserted ollis.  " door opened from
the bedroom into a corridorshe must have picked up hat and coat and
walked straight away, leaving everything she had there.  nyway, when
annaford, tired of waiting, knocked at the door and looked in, his
bird was flown.  Then, of course, there was a hueandcry, and a fine
revelation.  ut she'd got clear away, probably by some side door or
other exit, and although annaford, according to his own account, raked
London with a comb for her, she was never found.  anished"

"nd the necklace" inuired etherwick.

"That had vanished too," replied ollis.  "They searched her trunks and
things, but they found nothing but clothing.  hatever she had in the
way of money and valuables she'd carried off.  nd so annaford came
home, considerably down in the mouth, and he had to stand a good deal
of chaff.  nd if he found this woman's picture in a recent
paperwell, small wonder that he did cut it out   should say he was
probably going to set cotland Yard on her trackfor, of course,
there's no timelimit to criminal proceedings."

"This is the picture he cut out," observed etherwick, producing it
from his pocketbook.  "ut you say you never saw the woman"

"o,  never saw her," assented ollis, examining the print with
interested curiosity.  "o, of course,  can't recognise this.
andsome woman  ut you meet me at my officeclose bytomorrow
morning, at ten, and 'll take you to our policestation.  andham will
know"

andham, an elderly man with a sphinxlike manner and watchful eyes,
laughed sardonically when ollis explained etherwick's business.  e
laughed again when etherwick showed him the print.

"h, aye, that's the lady" he exclaimed.  "ot changed much, neither
gad, she was a smart 'un, that, Mr. ollis often laugh when 
think how she did annaford  ut you know, annaford was a
softhearted man.  t these little affairs, he was always for sparing
people's feelings.  ll very wellbut he had to pay for trying to
spare hers  ye, that's her  e have a portrait of her here, you
know."

"You have, eh" exclaimed etherwick.  " should like to see it."

"You can see it with pleasure, sir," replied the detective.  "nd look
at it as long as you like."  e turned to a desk close by and produced
a big album, full of portraits with written particulars beneath them.
"This is not, strictly speaking, a police photo," he continued.  "t's
not one that we took ourselves, ye understandwe never had the chance
obut when my lady was staying at the 'hite ear,' she had her
portrait taken by intring, the photographer, in ilver treet, and
intring was that suited with it that he put it in his window.  o, of
course, when her ladyship popped off with Malladale's necklace, we got
one of those portraits, and added it to our little collection.  ere it
isand you'll not notice so much difference between it and that
you've got in your hand, sir."

There was very little difference between the two photographs, and
etherwick said so.  nd presently he went away from the policeoffice
wondering more than ever about the woman with whose past adventures he
was concerning himself.

"May as well do the thing thoroughly while you're about it," remarked
ollis, as they walked off.  "ome and see Malladalehis shop is only
round the corner.  ot that he can tell you much more than 've told
you already."

ut Malladale proved himself able to tell a great deal more.   grave,
elderly man, presiding over an establishment which etherwick,
unaccustomed to the opulence of provincial manufacturing towns, was
astonished to find outside London, he ushered his visitor into a
private room, and listened to the reasons they gave for calling on him.
fter a close and careful inspection of the print which etherwick put
before him, he handed it back with a confident nod.

"There is no doubt whateverin my mindthat that is a print from a
photograph of the woman  knew as the onourable Mrs. hittingham," he
said.  "nd if it has been taken recently, she has altered very little
during the ten years that have elapsed since she was here in this town."

"You'd be glad to see her again, Mr. Malladalein the flesh" laughed
ollis.

The eweller shook his head.

" think not," he answered.  "o,  think not, Mr. ollis.  That's an
episode which  had put out of my minduntil you recalled it."

"utyour loss" suggested ollis.  "lose on four thousand pounds,
wasn't it"

Mr. Malladale raised one of his white hands to his grey beard and
coughed.  t was a cough that suggested discretion, confidence,
secrecy.  e smiled behind his moustache, and his spectacled eyes
seemed to twinkle.

" think  may venture a little disclosurein the company of two
gentlemen learned in the law," he said.  "To a solicitor whom  know
very well, and to a barrister introduced by him,  think  may reveal a
little secretbetween ourselves and to go no further.  The fact of
this matter is, gentlemen had no loss"

"hat" exclaimed ollis.  "oloss"

"ventually," replied the eweller.  "ventually  ndeed, to tell you
the truth plain,  made my profit, ander, something over."

ollis looked his bewilderment.

"o you mean thateventuallyyou were paid" he asked.

"recisely  ventuallyafter a considerable interval was paid,"
replied Mr. Malladale.  " will tell you the circumstances.  t is, 
believe, common knowledge that  sold the diamond necklace to Mrs.
hittingham for three thousand, nine hundred pounds, and that the
cheue she gave me was dishonoured, and that she cleared off with the
goods and was never heard of after she escaped from annaford.  ell,
two years ago, that is to say, eight years after her disappearance, 
one day received a letter which bore the ew York postmark.  t
contained a sheet of notepaper on which were a few words and a few
figures.  ut  have that now, and 'll show it to you."

oing to a safe in the corner of his parlour, the eweller, after some
searching, produced a paper and laid it before his visitors.
etherwick examined it with curiosity.  There was no name, no address,
no date all that appeared was, as Malladale had remarked, a few words,
a few figures, typewritten

  rincipal  . . . . . . . . . . ,
   years' nterest   . . . .  ,
                                 
                                 ,

  raft , enclosed herein kindly acknowledge in
  London Times.


"nclosed, as is there said, was a draft on a London bank for the
specified amount," continued Mr. Malladale.  ",  You may easily
believe that at first  could scarcely understand this  knew of no
one in ew York who owed me money.  ut the first
figures,threw light on the matter suddenly remembered Mrs.
hittingham and my lost necklace.  Then  saw through the
thingevidently Mrs. hittingham had become prosperous, wealthy, and
she was honest enough to make amends there was my principal, and eight
years' interest on it.  Yet,  felt somewhat doubtful about taking
it didn't know whether  mightn't be compounding a felony  You
gentlemen, of course, will appreciate my little difficulty"

"m" remarked ollis in a noncommittal tone.  "The more interesting
matter iswhat did you do  Though  think we already know," he added
with a smile.

"ell,  went to see annaford, and told him what  had received,"
answered the eweller.  "nd annaford said precisely what  expected
him to say.  e said 'ut the money in your pocket, Malladale, and say
nothing about it'  o did"

"ach of you feeling pretty certain that Mrs. hittingham was not
likely to show her face in ellithwaite again, no doubt" observed
ollis.  "ery interesting, Mr. Malladale.  ut it strikes me that
whether she ever comes to ellithwaite again or not, Mrs. hittingham,
or whatever her name may be nowadays, is in ngland."

"You think so" asked the eweller.

"er picture's recently appeared in an nglish paper, anyway," said
ollis.

"ut pictures of famous merican ladies appear in nglish newspapers,"
suggested Mr. Malladale.  " have recollections of several.  ow my
notion is that Mrs. hittingham, who was a very handsome and very
charming woman, eventually went across the tlantic and married an
merican millionaire  That's how  figured it.  nd  have often
wondered who she is now."

"That's precisely what  want to find out," said etherwick.  "ne
thing is certainannaford knew  f he'd been alive he could have
told us.  ecause in whatever paper it was that this print appeared
there would be some letterpress about it, giving the name, and why it
appeared at all."

"You can trace that," remarked ollis.

"ust so," agreed etherwick, "and  may as well get back to town and
begin the ob.  ut  think with Mr. ollis," he added, turning to the
eweller, " believe that the woman is here in ngland  think it
possible, too, that annaford knew where.  nd  don't think it
impossible that between the time of his cutting out her picture from
the paper and the time of his sudden death he came in touch with her."

"You think it probable that she, in some way, had something to do with
his murderif it was murder" asked Mr. Malladale.

" think it possible," replied etherwick.  "There are strange features
in the case.  ne of the strangest is this.  hy, when annaford cut
out that picture, for his own purposes, evidently with no intention of
showing it to anyone else, did he cut it out without the name and
letterpress which must have been under and over it"

"ueer, certainly" said ollis.  "ut, you know, you can soon
ascertain what that name was.  ll you've got to do is to get another
copy of the paper."

"nfortunately, annaford's granddaughter doesn't know what particular
paper it was," replied etherwick.  "er sole recollection of it is
that it was some local newspaper, sent to annaford by post, the very
morning that he left here for London."

"tillit can be traced," said ollis.  "t was in some paperand
there'll be other copies."

resently he and etherwick left the eweller's shop.  utside, ollis
led his companion across the street, and turned into a narrow alley.

"'ll show you a man who'll remember Mrs. hittingham better than
anybody in ellithwaite," he said, with a laugh.  "etter even than
Malladale.   told you she stayed at the 'hite ear' when she was
here  ell, since then the entire staff of that eminent hostelry has
been changed, from the manager to the boots don't think there's a
man or woman there who was there ten years ago.  ut there's a man at
the end of this passage who was formerly hallporter at the 'hite
ear'mblet udsonand who now keeps a rather cosy little saloonbar
down here we'll drop in on him.  e's what we call a bit of a
character, and if you can get him to talk, he's usually worth listening
to."




T 

ML  

ollis led the way farther along the alley, between high, black,
windowless walls, and suddenly turning into a little court, paused
before a door set deep in the side of an old halftimbered house.

"ueer old place, this" he remarked over his shoulder.  "ut you'll
get a glass of as good port or sherry from this chap as you'd get
anywhere in nglandhe knows his customers  ome in."

e led the way into a place the like of which etherwick had never
seena snug, cosy room, panelled and raftered in old oak, with a
bright fire burning in an open hearth and the flicker of its flames
dancing on the old brass and pewter that ornamented the walls.  There
was a small barcounter on one side of it and behind this, in his
shirtsleeves, and with a cigar protruding from the corner of a pair of
cleanshaven, humorous lips, stood a keeneyed man, busily engaged in
polishing wineglasses.

"ood morning, gentlemen" he said heartily.  "ice morning, Mr.
ollis, for the time o' year.  nd what can  do for you and your
friend, sir"

ollis glanced round the roomempty, save for themselves.  e drew a
stool to the bar and motioned etherwick to follow his example.

" think we'll try your very excellent dry sherry, udson," he
answered.  "That is, if it's as good as it was last time  tasted it."

"lways up to standard, Mr. ollis, always up to standard, sir"
replied the barkeeper.  "o inferior ualities, no substitutes, and no
trading on past reputation in this establishment, gentlemen  s good a
glass of dry sherry here, sir, as you'd get where sherry wine comes
fromand you can't say that of most places in ngland,  think.
verything's of the best here, Mr. ollisas you know"

ollis responded with a little light chaff suddenly he bent across the
bar.

"udson" he said confidentially.  "My friend here has something he'd
like to show you.  ow, then," he continued, as etherwick, in response
to this, had produced the picture, "do you recognise that"

The barkeeper put on a pair of spectacles and turned the picture to
the light, examining it closely.  is lips tightened then relaxed in a
cynical smile.

"ye" he said, half carelessly.  "t's the woman that did old
Malladale out of that diamond necklace.  f courseMistress
hittingham"

"ould you know her again, if you met hernow" asked ollis.

The barkeeper picked up one of his glasses and began a vigorous
polishing.

"ye" he answered, laconically.  "nd  should know her by something
else than her face"

ust then two men came in, and udson broke off to attend to their
wants.  ut presently they carried their glasses away to a snug corner
near the fire, and the barkeeper once more turned to ollis and
etherwick.

"ye" he said confidentially.  "f need were,  could tell that party
by something else than her face, handsome as that is   used to tell
annaford when he was busy trying to find her that if he'd any
difficulty about making certain,  could identify her if nobody else
could  You see,  saw a deal of her when she was stopping at the
'hite ear.'  nd  knew something that nobody else knew."

"hat is it" asked etherwick.

udson leaned closer across the counter and lowered his voice.

"he was a big, handsome woman, this Mrs. hittingham," he continued.
"ery showy, dressy woman fond of fine clothes and ewellery, and so
on sort of woman, you know, that would attract attention anywhere.
nd one of these women, too, that was evidently used to being waited on
hand and footshe took her money's worth out of the 'hite ear,' 
can tell you   did a deal for her, one way or another, and 'll say
this for her she was free enough with her money.  f it so happened
that she wanted things doing for her, she kept you fairly on the go
till they were done, but she threw fiveshilling pieces and halfcrowns
about as if they were farthings  he'd send you to take a sixpenny
telegram and give you a couple of shillings for taking it.  ell, now,
as  say,  saw a deal of her, one way and another, getting cabs for
her, and taking things up to her room, and doing this, that, and
t'other.  nd it was with going up there one day suddenlike, with a
telegram that had ust come, that  found out something about
hersomething that, as  say,  could have told her by anywhere, even
if she could have changed her face and put a wig on"

"yeand what, now" asked ollis.

"This" answered udson with a knowing look.  "Maybe 'm a noticing
sort of chapanyhow, there was a thing  always noticed about Mrs.
hittingham.  herever she was, and no matter how she was dressed,
whether it was in her goingout things or her dinner finery, she always
wore a band of black velvet round her right forearm, ust above the
wrist, where women wear bracelets.  n fact, it was a sort of bracelet,
a strip, as  say, of black velvet, happen about two inches wide, and
on the front a cameo ornament, the sie of a shilling, white stone or
something of that sort, with one of these heathen figures carved on it.
There were other folk about the place noticed that black velvet band,
too tell you she was never seen without it the chambermaids said
she slept with it on.  ut on the occasion 'm telling you about, when
 went up to her room with a telegram,  caught her without it.  he
opened her door to see who knockedshe was in a dressinggown, going
to change for dinner,  reckon, and she held out her right hand for
what 'd brought her.  The black velvet band wasn't on it, and for ust
a second like  saw what was on her arm"

"Yes" said ollis.  "omethingremarkable"

"or a ladyaye" replied udson, with a grim laugh.  "er arm was
tattooed  ight round the place where she always wore this black
velvet band there was a snake, red and green, and yellow, and blue,
with its tail in its mouthwonderfully done, too it had been no
novice that had done that bit of work,  can tell you  f course, 
ust saw it, and no more, but there was a strong electric light close
by, and  did see it, and saw it plain and all.  nd that's a thing
that that woman, whoever she may be, and wherever she's got to, can
never rub off, nor scrub offshe'll carry that to the day of her
death."

The two listeners looked at each other.

"dd" remarked ollis.

etherwick turned to the barkeeper.

"id she notice that you saw that her arm was tattooed" he asked.

"ay,  don't think she did," replied udson.  "f course, the thing
was over in a second.   made no sign that 'd seen aught particular,
and she said nought.  ut saw"

ust then other customers came in, and the barkeeper turned away to
attend to their wants.  ollis and etherwick moved from the counter to
one of the snug corners at the farther end of the room.

"hoever she may be, wherever she may beas udson said ust now,"
remarked ollis, "and if this woman really had anything to do with the
mysterious circumstances of annaford's death, she ought not to be
difficult to find.   woman who carries an indefaceable mark like that
on her arm, and whose picture has recently appeared in a newspaper,
should easily be traced."

" think  shall get at her through the picture," agreed etherwick.
"The newspaper production seems to have been done from a photograph
which, from its clearness and finish, was probably taken by some
firstclass firm in London.   shall go round such firms as soon as 
get back.  t may be, of course, that she's nothing whatever to do with
annaford's murder, but still, it's a trail that's got to be followed
to the end now that one's started out on it.  ell that seems to
finish my business hereas far as she's concerned.  ut there's
another matter told you that when annaford came to town he had on
him a sealed packet containing the secret of some invention or
discovery, and that it's strangely and unaccountably missing.  is
granddaughter says that he worked this thing outwhatever it isin a
laboratory that he had in his garden.  ow then, before  go  want to
see that laboratory.  s he's only recently left the place,  suppose
things will still be pretty much as he left them at his old house.
here did he live"

"e lived on the outskirts of the town," replied ollis.  "n
oldfashioned house that he bought some years ago know it by sight
well enough, though 've never been in it.   don't suppose it's let
yet, though  know it's being advertised in the local papers.  Let's
get some lunch at the 'hite ear,' and then we'll drive up there and
see what we can do.  You want to get an idea of what it was that
annaford had invented"

"ust so," assented etherwick.  "f the secret was worth all that he
told his granddaughter it was, he may have been murdered by somebody
who wanted to get sole possession of it.  nyway, it's another trail
that's got to be worked on."

" never heard of annaford as an inventor or experimenter," remarked
ollis.  "ut there,  knew little about him, except in his official
capacity he and his granddaughter, and an elderly woman they kept as a
working housekeeper, were uiet sort of folk.   knew that he brought
up his granddaughter from infancy, and gave her a rattling good
education at the irls' igh chool, but beyond that,  know little of
their private affairs.   suppose he amused himself in this laboratory
you speak of in his spare time"

"abbled in chemistry,  understand," said etherwick.  "nd, if it
hasn't been dismantled, we may find something in that laboratory that
will give us a clue of some sort."

ollis seemed to reflect for a minute or two.

"'ve an idea" he said suddenly.  "There's a man who lunches at the
'hite ear' every daya man named ollison he's analytical chemist
to a big firm of dyers in the town.  've seen him in conversation with
annaford now and then.  erhaps he could tell us something on this
point.  ome on  this is ust about his time for lunch."

 few minutes later, in the coffeeroom of the hotel, ollis led
etherwick up to a bearded and spectacled man who had ust sat down to
lunch, and having introduced him, briefly detailed the obect of his
visit to ellithwaite.  ollison nodded and smiled.

" understand," he said, as they seated themselves at his table.
"annaford did dabble a bit in chemistryin uite an amateur way.  ut
as to inventing anything that was worth all thatcome  till, he was
an ingenious man, for an amateur, and he may have hit on something
fairly valuable."

"You've no idea what he was after" suggested etherwick.

"f late, no  ut some time ago he was immensely interested in aniline
dyes," replied ollison.  "e used to talk to me about them.  That's a
subect of infinite importance in this district.  f course, as  dare
say you know, the ermans have been vastly ahead of us as regards
aniline dyes, and we've got most, if not all, of the stuff used, from
ermany.  annaford used to worry himself as to why we couldn't make
our own aniline dyes, and  believe he experimented.  ut, with his
resources, as an amateur, of course, that was hopeless."

"'ve sometimes seen him talking to you," observed ollis.  "You've no
idea what he was after, of late"

"o.  e used to ask me technical uestions," answered ollison.  "You
know,  ust regarded him as a man who had a natural taste for
experimenting with things.  This was evidently his hobby.   used to
chaff him about it.  till, he was a purposeful man, and by reading and
experiment he'd picked up a lot of knowledge."

"nd,  suppose, it's within the bounds of possibility that he had hit
on something of practical value" suggested etherwick.

"h, uite within such boundsand he may have done," agreed ollison.
"'ve known of much greater amateurs suddenly discovering something.
The uestion then isdo they know enough to turn their discovery to
any practical purpose and account"

"vidently, from what he told his granddaughter, annaford did think he
knew enough," said etherwick.  "hat  want to find out from a visit
to his old laboratory iswhat had he discovered"

"nd as you're not a chemist, nor even a dabbler," remarked ollis,
with a laugh, "that won't be easy  You'd better come with us after
lunch, ollison."

" can give you a couple of hours," assented ollison.  "'m already
curiousespecially if any discovery we can make tends to throw light
on the mystery of annaford's death.  ity the police haven't got hold
of the man who was with him," he added, glancing at etherwick.  "
suppose you could identify him"

"nless he's an absolute adept at disguising himself, yespositively"
replied etherwick.  "e was a noticeable man."

n hour later the three men drove up to a house which stood a little
way out of the town, on the edge of the moorland that stretched towards
the great range of hills on the west.  The house, an oldfashioned,
solitary place, was empty, save for a caretaker who had been installed
in its back rooms to keep it aired and to show it to possible tenants.
The laboratory, a stonewalled, timberroofed shed at the end of the
garden, had never been opened, said the caretaker, since Mr. annaford
locked it up and left it.  ut the key was speedily forthcoming, and
the three visitors entered and looked round, each with different
valuings of what he saw.

The whole place was a wilderness of litter and untidiness.  hatever
annaford had possessed in the way of laboratory plant and appliances
had been removed, and now there was little but rubbishglass, whole
and broken, paper, derelict boxes and crates, odds and ends of
wreckageto look at.  ut the analytical chemist glanced about him
with a knowing eye, examining bottles and boxes, picking up a thing
here and another there, and before long he turned to his companions
with a laugh, pointing at the same time to a table in a corner which
was covered with and dustlined pots.

"t's very easy to see what annaford was after" he said.  "e's been
trying to evolve a new ink"

"nk" exclaimed ollis incredulously.  "ren't there plenty of inks on
the market"

"o end" agreed ollison with another laugh, and again pointing to the
table.  "These are specimens of all the betterknown onesritish, of
course, for no really decent ink is made elsewhere.  ut even the very
best ink, up to now, isn't perfect.  annaford perhaps thought, being
an amateur, that he could make a better than the known best.
nkthat's what he's been after.   superior, perfectlyfluid,
penetrating, permanent, noncorrosive writinginkthat's been his
notion, a thousand to one   observe the presence of lots of stuffs
that he's used."

e showed them various things, explaining their properties and adding
some remarks on the history of the manufacture of writinginks during
the last hundred years.

"Taking it altogether," he concluded, "and in spite of manufacturers'
advertisements and boasting, there isn't a really absolutely perfect
writingfluid on the marketthat  know of, anyway.  f annaford
thought he could make one, and succeeded, well, 'd be glad to have his
formula  Money in it"

"To the extent of a hundred thousand pounds" asked etherwick,
remembering what hona had told him.  "ll that"

"h, well" laughed ollison, "you must remember that inventors are
always very sanguine always apt to see everything through
rosecoloured spectacles invariably prone to exaggerate the merits of
their inventions.  ut if annaford, by experiment, really hit on a
firstclass formula for making a writingink superior in all the
necessary ualities to its rivalsyes, there'd be a pot of money in
it.  o doubt of that"

" suppose he'd have to take out a patent for his invention" suggested
etherwick.

"h, to be sure   should think that was one of his reasons for going
to Londonto see after it." assented ollison.  e looked round again,
and again laughed.  "ell," he said, " think you know nowyou may be
confident about it from what 've seen herewhat annaford was after
nkust ink"

etherwick accepted this udgment, and when he left ellithwaite later
in the afternoon on his return ourney to London, he summed up the
results of his visit.  They were two.  irst, he had discovered that
the woman of whom annaford had spoken in the train was a person who
ten years before had been known as Mrs. hittingham, appeared to be
some sort of an adventuress, and, in spite of her restitution to the
eweller whom she had defrauded, was still liable to arrest,
conviction, and punishmentif she could be found.  econd, he had
found out that the precious invention of which annaford had spoken so
confidently and enthusiastically to his granddaughter and the
particulars of which had mysteriously disappeared, related to the
manufacture of a new writingink, which might, in truth, prove a very
valuable commercial asset.  o far, so good he was finding things out.
s he ate his dinner in the restaurant car he considered his next
steps.  ut it needed little consideration to resolve on them.  e must
find out all about the woman whose picture lay in his pocketbookwhat
she now called herself where she was how her photograph came to be
reproduced in a newspaper and, last, but far from least, if annaford,
after seeing the reproduction, had got into touch with her or given
information about her.  To the man in the train annaford had remarked
that he had said nothing about her until that eveningyes, but was
that man the only man to whom he had spoken  o much for thatand the
next thing was to find out somehow what had become of the sealed packet
which annaford undoubtedly had on him when he went out of Malter's
otel on the night of his death.




T 

L LT

ext morning, and before calling on either enthwaite or hona
annaford, etherwick set out on a tour of the fashionable
photographers in the est nd of London.  fter all, there were not so
many of them, so many at any rate of the very famous ones.  e made a
hit and began to work methodically.  is first few coverts were drawn
blank, but ust before noon, and as he was thinking of knocking off for
lunch, he started his fox.  n a palatial establishment in ond treet
the person to whom he applied, showing his picture, gave an immediate
smile of recognition.

"You want to know who is the original of this" he said.  "ertainly
Lady iversreade, of iversreade ourt, near orking."

etherwick had no deep acuaintance with ebrett nor with urke, nor
even with the list of peers, baronets and knights given in the ordinary
reference books, and to him the name of Lady iversreade was absolutely
unknownhe had never heard of her.  ut the man to whom he had shown
the print, and who now held it in his hand, seemed to consider that
Lady iversreade was, or should be, as well known to everybody as she
evidently was to him.

"This print is from one of our photographs of Lady iversreade," he
said, turning to a side table in the receptionroom in which they were
standing and picking up a framed portrait.  "This one."

"Then you probably know in what newspaper this print appeared"
suggested etherwick.  "That's really what 'm desirous of finding out."

"h, it appeared in several," answered the photographer.  "ecently.
t was about the time that Lady iversreade opened some home or
institute forget what.  There was an account of it in the papers,
and naturally her portrait was reproduced."

etherwick made a plausible prearranged excuse for his curiosity, and
went away.  Lady iversreadeevidently some woman of rank, or means,
or position.  ut was she identical with the Mrs. hittingham of ten
years agothe Mrs. hittingham who did the ellithwaite eweller out
of a necklace worth nearly four thousand pounds and cleverly escaped
arrest at the hands of annaford  nd if so...

ut that led to indefinite vistas the main thing at present was to
find out all that could be found out about Lady iversreade, of
iversreade ourt, near orking.  etherwick could doubtless have
obtained considerable information from the fashionable photographer,
but he had carefully refrained from showing too much inuisitiveness.
Moreover, he knew a man, one oxley, a fellow clubmember, who was
always fully posted up in all the doings of the social and fashionable
world and could, if he would, tell him everything about Lady
iversreadethat was, if there was anything to tell about her.  oxley
was one of those bachelor men about town who went everywhere, knew
everybody, and kept himself fully informed he invariably lunched at
this particular club, the unior Megatherium, and thither etherwick
presently proceeded, bent on finding him.

e was fortunate in running oxley to earth almost as soon as he
entered the sacred and exclusive portals.  oxley was lunching and
there was no one else at his table.  etherwick oined him, and began
the usual small talk about nothing in particular.  ut he soon came to
his one point.

"Look here" he said, at a convenient interval.  " want to ask you
something.  You know everybody and everything.  ho is Lady
iversreade, who's recently opened some home or institution, or
hospital or something"

"ne of the richest women in ngland" replied oxley promptly.  "orth
a couple of millions or so.  That's who she iswho she was,  don't
know.  on't suppose anybody else does, either.  n this country,
anyhow."

"hat, is she a foreigner, then" asked etherwick.  "'ve seen her
portrait in the papersthat's why  asked you who she is.  oesn't
look foreign,  think."

" can tell you all that is known about her," said oxley, "and that's
not much.  he's the widow of old ir ohn iversreade, the famous
contractorthe man who made a pot of money building railways, and dams
across big rivers, and that sort of thing, and got a knighthood for it.
e also built himself a magnificent place near orking, and called it
iversreade ourtust the type of place a modern millionaire would
build.  ow, old ir ohn had been a bachelor all his life, until he
was over sixtyno time for anything but his contracts, you know.  ut
when he was about sixtyfive, which would be some six or seven years
ago, he went over to the nited tates and made a rather lengthy stay
there.  nd when he returned he brought a wife with himthe lady
you're inuiring about."

"merican, then" suggested etherwick.

"ell, he married her over there, certainly," said oxley.  "ut 
should say she isn't merican."

"You've met herpersonally"

"ust.  un across her once or twice at various affairs, and been
introduced to her, uite casually.  o,  don't think she's merican.
f  wanted to label her,  should say she was cosmopolitan."

"oman of the world, eh"

"ecidedly so.  andsome womanselfpossessedselfassuredsmart,
clever.   think she'll know how to take care of the money her husband
left her."

"Leave her everything"

"very pennyexcept some inconsiderable legacies to charitable
institutions.  t was said at the timeit's two years since the old
chap diedthat she's got over two millions."

"nd this institution, or whatever it is"

"h, that  That was in the papers not so long since."

"'m no great reader of newspapers.  hat about it"

"h, she's started a home for wounded officers near iversreade ourt.
There was some big country house near there emptycouldn't really be
sold or let.  he bought it, renovated it, fitted it up, stuck a staff
of nurses and servants in, and got it blessed by the ar ffice.  olly
nice place,  believe, and she pays the piper."

"oing the benevolent business, eh"

"o it appears.  asy game, too, when you've got a couple of millions
behind you.  seful, though."

oxley went away soon after that, and etherwick, wondering about what
he had learned, and now infinitely inuisitive about the identity of
Lady iversreade with Mrs. hittingham, went into the smokingroom, and
more from habit than because he really wanted to see it, picked up a
copy of The Times.  lmost the first thing on which his glance
lighted was the name that was ust then in his thoughtsthere it was,
in capitals, at the head of an advertisement


"LY ' M   , Y.euired at
once a esident Ladyecretary, fully competent to undertake accounts
and correspondence and thoroughly trained in shorthand and typewriting
a knowledge of rench and erman would be a high recommendation.
pplication should be made personally any day this week between .
and . and . and . to Lady iversreade, iversreade ourt,
orking."


etherwick threw the paper aside, left the club, and at the first
newsagent's he came to bought another copy.  ith this in his hand he
umped into a taxicab and set off for urrey treet, wondering if he
would find hona annaford still at Malter's otel.  e was fortunate
in thatshe had not yet leftand in a few minutes he was giving her a
full and detailed account of his doings since his last interview with
her.  he listened to his story about ellithwaite and his discoveries
of that morning with a slightly puled look.

"hy are you taking all this trouble" she asked suddenly and abruptly.
"You're doing more, going into things more, than the police are.
Matherfield was here this morning to tell me, he said, how they were
getting on.  They aren't getting on at allthey haven't made one
single discovery they've heard nothing, found out nothing, about the
man in the train or the man at ictoriathey're ust where they were.
ut youyou've found out a lot  hy are you so energetic about it"

"ut it down to professional inuisitiveness, if you like," answered
etherwick, smiling.  "'minterested.  Tremendously  You see,
too, was there in the train, like the man they haven't found.  ell,
nownow that 've got to this point 've arrived at,  want you to
take a hand."

"  n what way" exclaimed hona.

etherwick pulled out The Times and pointed to the advertisement.

" want you to go down to orking tomorrow morning and personally
interview Lady iversreade in response to that," he said.  "You've all
the ualifications she specifies, so you've an excellent excuse for
calling on her.  hether you'd care to take the post is another
matterwhat  want is that you should see her under conditions that
will enable you to observe her closely."

"hy" asked hona.

" want you to see if she wears such a band as that which udson told
ollis and myself about," replied etherwick.  "harp eyes like yours
will soon see that.  ndif she does, then she's Mrs. hittingham  n
that case,  might ask you to do morestill more."

"hat, for instance" she inuired.

"ell, to do your best to get this post," he answered.  " think that
you, with your ualifications, could get it."

"ndyour obect in that" she asked.

"To keep an eye on Lady iversreade," he replied promptly.  "f the
Mrs. hittingham of ten years ago at ellithwaite is the same woman as
the Lady iversreade of iversreade ourt of today, then, in view of
your grandfather's murder,  want to know a lot more about her  To
have youtherewould be an immense help."

"'m to be a sort of spy, eh" asked hona.

"etective, if you like," assented etherwick.  "hy not"

"You forget this," she remarked.  "f this Lady iversreade is
identical with the Mrs. hittingham of ten years ago, she'd remember my
nameannaford  he's not likely to have forgotten uperintendent
annaford of ellithwaite"

"xactlybut 've thought of that little matter," replied etherwick.
"all yourself by some other name.  Your mother's, for instance."

"That was eatherstone," said hona.

"There you are  o as Miss eatherstone.  s for your address, give
your aunt's address at Tooting.  asy enough, you see," laughed
etherwick.  "nce you begin it properly."

"There's another thing, though," she obected.  "eferences  he'll
want those."

"ust as easy," answered etherwick.  "ive me as one and enthwaite as
the other.  'll speak to him about it.  Two barristers of the Middle
Templeexcellent  omeall you've got to do is to work the scheme
out fully and carry it out with assurance, and you don't know what we
might discover."

hona considered matters awhile, watching him steadily.

"You think thatsomehowthis woman may be at the back of the mystery
surrounding my grandfather's murder" she suddenly asked.

" think it's uite within the bounds of probability," he answered.

"ll right," she said abruptly.  "'ll go.  Tomorrow morning, 
suppose"

"ooner the better," agreed etherwick.  "nd, look here, 'll go down
with you.  e'll go by the . from ictoria, drive to this place,
and 'll wait outside while you have your interview.  fter that we'll
get some lunch in orkingand you can tell me your news."

ext morning found etherwick pacing the platform at ictoria and on
the lookout for his fellowcompanion.  he came to him a little before
the train was due to leave, and he noticed at once that she had
discarded the mourning garments in which he had found her the previous
afternoon she now appeared in a smart tailormade coat and skirt, and
looked the part he wanted her to assumethat of a capable and
selfreliant young business woman.

"ood" he said approvingly, as they went to find their seats.
"othing like dressing up to it.  You're all ready with your lines,
eh mean, you've settled on all you're going to say and do"

"Leave that to me," she answered with a laugh, " shan't forget the
primary obect, anyway.  ut 've been wonderingsupposing we come to
the conclusion that this Lady iversreade is the Mrs. hittingham of
ten years ago  hat are you going to do then"

"My ideas are hay on that pointat present," confessed etherwick.
"The first thing, surely, is to establish identity.  on't forget that
the main thing to do at iversreade ourt is to get a good look at Lady
iversreade's right wrist, and see what's on it"

iversreade ourt proved to be some distance from orking, in the Leith
ill district etherwick charted a taxicab and gave his companion
final instructions as they rode out.  alf an hour's run brought them
to the housea big, pretentious, imitation liabethan structure, set
on the hillside amongst a grove of firs and pines, and having an
ornamental park laid out between its gardens and terraces and the high
road.  t the lodge gates he stopped the driver and got out.

"'ll wait here for you," he said to hona.  "You ride up to the house,
get your business done, and come back here.  e watchful nowof
anything."

hona nodded reassuringly and went off etherwick lighted his pipe and
strolled about admiring the scenery.  ut his thoughts were with hona
he was wondering what adventures she was having in the big mansion
which the late contractor had built amidst the woods.  nd hona kept
him wondering some time an hour had elapsed before the cab came back.
ith a hand on its door, he turned to the driver

"o to the 'hite orse' now," he said.  "e'll lunch there, and
afterwards you can take us to the station.  ell" he continued, as he
got in and seated himself at hona's side.  "hat luck"

"ood,  should say," answered hona.  "he wears a broad black velvet
band on her right wrist, and on the outer face is a small cameo.  ow's
that"

"recisely" exclaimed etherwick.  "ust what that barkeeper chap at
ellithwaite described.  ears it openlymakes no attempt at
concealment beneath her sleeve, eh"

"one," answered hona.  "he was wearing a smart, fashionable,
shortsleeved umper.  he'd a very fine diamond bracelet on the other
wrist."

"nd she herself," asked etherwick.  "hat sort of woman is she"

"That's a very good photograph of her that my grandfather cut out of
the paper," replied hona.  "ery good, indeed   knew her at once.
he's a tall, fine, handsome, wellpreserved woman, perhaps forty,
perhaps less.  ery easy, accustomed manner a regular woman of the
world  should think.  uite ready to talk about herself and her
doingsshe told me the whole history of this ome she's started and
took me to see itit's a fine old house, much more attractive than the
ourt, a little way along the hillside.  he told me that it was her
great hobby, and that she's devoting all her time to it.   should say
that she's genuinely interested in its welfaregenuinely"

"he impressed you" suggested etherwick.

" think, from what  saw and heard, that she's a goodnatured,
probably warmhearted, woman.  he spoke very feelingly of the patients
she's got in her ome, anyhow."

"nd the postthe secretaryship"

" can have it if  want itof course,  told her  did.  he examined
me pretty closely about my ualificationsshe herself speaks rench
and erman like a nativeand  mentioned you and Mr. enthwaite as
references.  he's going to write to you both today.  oit's for you
to decide."

" suppose it's really for you"

"o'm willing, eager, indeed, to do anything to clear up the
mystery about my grandfather's murder.  ut don't think this woman
had anything to do with it.  n my opinionand  suppose 've got some
feminine intuitionshe's honest and straightforward enough."

"nd yet it looks as if she were certainly the Mrs. hittingham who did
a ellithwaite eweller to the tune of four thousand pounds" laughed
etherwick.  "That wasn't very honest or straightforward"

"'ve been thinking about that," said hona.  "erhaps, after all, she
really thought the cheue would be met, and anyway, she did send the
man his money, even though it was a long time afterwards.  nd
againan important matterLady iversreade may not be Mrs.
hittingham at all.  More women than one wear wristlets of velvet."

"utthe portrait" exclaimed etherwick.  "The positive identity"

"ell," answered hona, "'m willing to go there and to try to find out
more.  ut, frankly,  think Lady iversreade's all right  irst
impression, anyhow"

The cab drew up at the "hite orse," and etherwick led hona into the
coffeeroom.  ut they had hardly taken their seats when the manager
came in.

"oes your name happen to be etherwick, sir" he inuired.  "ust
sothank you.   Mr. Mapperley has twice rung you up here during the
last hourhe's on the phone again now, if you'll speak to him."

"'ll come," said etherwick.  "That's my clerk," he murmured to hona
as he rose.  " told him to ring me up here between twelve and three if
necessary.  ack in a minute."

ut he was away several minutes, and when he came to her again, his
face was grave.  "ere's a new development" he said, bending across
the table and whispering.  "The police have found the man who was with
your grandfather in the train  Matherfield wants me to identify him.
nd you'll gather from that that they've found him dead  e must lunch
uickly and catch the twotwentyfour."




T 

L' T

etherwick went to the hotel telephone again before he had finished his
lunch, and as a result Matherfield was on the platform at ictoria when
the twotwentyfour ran in.  e showed no surprise at seeing etherwick
and hona together his manifest concern was to get etherwick to
himself and away from the station.  nd etherwick, seeing this, said
goodbye to hona with a whispered word that he would look in at
Malter's otel before evening a few minutes later he and Matherfield
were in a taxicab together, hastening along uckingham alace oad.

"ell" inuired etherwick.  "This man"

" don't think there's any doubt about his being the man you saw with
annaford," replied Matherfield.  "e answers to your description,
anyway.  ut 'll tell you how we came across his track.  Last night a
man named ppleyard came to mehe's a chap who has a chemist's shop in
orseferry oad, estminstera middleaged, uiet sort of man, who
prefaced his remarks by telling us that he very rarely had time to read
newspapers or he'd have been round to see us before.  ut yesterday he
happened to pick up a copy of one of last unday's papers, and he read
an account of the annaford affair.  Then he remembered something that
seemed to him to have a possible connection with it.  ome little time
ago he advertised for an assistanta ualified assistant.  e'd two or
three applications which weren't exactly satisfactory.  Then, one
eveninghe couldn't give any exact date, but from various things he
told us  reckoned up that it must have been on the very evening on
which annaford met his deatha man came and made a personal
application.  ppleyard described himmediumsied, a spare man,
sallowcomplexioned, thin face and beard, large dark eyes, very
intelligent, superior manner, poorly dressed, and evidently in low
water"

"That's the man, 'll be bound" exclaimed etherwick.  "id he give
this chemist his name"

"e didname and address," answered Matherfield.  "e said his name
was ames ranett, and his address umber , ligwood's ents, ray's
nn oadolborn end.  e told ppleyard that he was a ualified
chemist, and produced his proofs and some references.  e also said
that though he'd never had a business of his own he'd been employed,
as, indeed, the references showed, by some good provincial firms at one
time or another.  Lately he'd been in the employ of a firm of
manufacturing chemists in ast amfor some reason or other their
trade had fallen off, and they'd had to reduce their staff, and he'd
been thrown out of work, and had had the further bad luck to be
seriously ill.  This, he said, had exhausted his small means, and he
was very anxious to get another obso anxious that he appeared to
come to ppleyard on very low terms.  ppleyard told him he'd inuire
into the references and write to him in a day or two.  e did inuire,
found the references uite satisfactory, and wrote to ranett engaging
him.  ut ranett never turned up, and ppleyard heard no more of him
until he read this unday paper.  Then he felt sure ranett was the
man, and came to me."

" shouldn't think there's any doubt in the case," remarked etherwick.
"ut before we go any further, a uestion.  id ppleyard say what time
it was when this man came to him that evening"

"e did.  t was ust as he was closing his shopnine o'clock.
ranett stopped talking with him about half an hour.  ndeed, ppleyard
told me more.  fter they'd finished their talk, ppleyard, who doesn't
live at the shop, locked it up, and he then invited ranett to step
across the street with him and have a drink before going home.  They
had a drink together in a neighbouring saloon bar, and chatted a bit
there it would be nearly ten o'clock, according to ppleyard, when
ranett left him.  nd he remembered that ranett, on leaving him, went
round the corner into ictoria treet, on his way, no doubt, to the
nderground."

"nd in ictoria treet, eually without doubt, he met annaford,"
muttered etherwick.  "ell, and the rest of it"

"ell, of course, as soon as  learnt all this,  determined to go
myself to ligwood's ents," replied Matherfield.  " went, first thing
this morning.  ligwood's ents is a slum streetonly a man who is
very low down in the world would ever dream of renting a room there.
t's a sort of alley or court on the righthand side of ray's nn
oad, going upsome halfdoen sualid houses on each side, let off in
tenements.  umber  was a particularly sualid houseslatternly
women and sualling brats about the door and general dirt and
shabbiness all round.  one of the women about the place knew the name
of ranett, but after 'd described the man  wanted they argued that
it must be the gentleman on the top back they added the further
information that they hadn't seen him for some days.   went up a
filthy stair to the room they indicated the door was locked and 
couldn't get any response to my repeated knockings.  o then  set out
to discover the landlord, and eventually unearthed a beery individual
in a neighbouring lowclass tavern.   got out of him that he had a
lodger named ranett, who paid him six shillings a week for this top
back room, and he suddenly remembered that ranett hadn't paid his last
week's rent.  That made more impression on him than anything  said,
and he went with me to the house.  nd to cut things short, we forced
the door, and found the man dead in his bed"

"ead" exclaimed etherwick.  "eadthen"

"ead thenyes, and he'd been dead several days, according to the
doctors," replied Matherfield grimly.  "ead enough  t was a poor
room, but cleanyou could see from various little things that the man
had been used to a better condition.  ut as regards himselfhe'd
evidently gone to bed in the usual way.  is clothes were all carefully
folded and arranged, and by the side of the bed there was a chair on
which was a halfburnt candle and an evening newspaper."

"That would fix the date," suggested etherwick.

"f course, it didand it was the same date as that on which annaford
died," answered Matherfield.  "'ve made a careful note of that
circumstance  verything looked as if the man had gone to bed in ust
his ordinary way, read the paper a bit, blown out his light, dropped
off to sleep, and died in his sleep."

"Yesand from what cause,  wonder" exclaimed etherwick.

"recisely the same idea occurred to me, knowing what  did about
annaford," said Matherfield.  "owever, the doctors will tell us more
about that.  ut to wind up had a man of mine with me, and  left
him in charge while  got further help, and sent for ppleyard.
ppleyard identified the dead man at once as the man who had been to
see him.  ndeed, on opening the door, we found ppleyard's letter,
engaging him, lying with one or two others, ust inside.  o that's
about all, except that  now want to know if you can positively
identify him as the man you saw with annaford, and that  also want to
open a locked box that we found in the room, which may contain
something that will give us further information.  ltogether, it's a
step forward."

"Yes," admitted etherwick.  "t's something.  ut there's spadework
to be done yet, Matherfield.   don't think there's any doubt, now,
that ranett encountered annaford after he left ppleyardand that
indicates that ranett and annaford were old acuaintances.  ut,
supposing they met at, or soon after, ten o'clockwhere did they go,
where did they spend their time between that and the time they entered
my compartment at t. ames's ark"

"That would bewhat" asked Matherfield.

"t was well after midnightmine was the last train going east,
anyway," said etherwick.  " only ust caught it at loane uare.
ut we can ascertain the exact time, to a minute.  till, those two,
meeting accidentally, as  conclude they did, must have been together
two or three hours.  hereat that time of night.  urely there must
be some way of finding that out  Two men, each rather
noticeablesomebody must have seen them together, somewhere  t seems
impossible that they shouldn't have been seen."

"ye, but in my experience, Mr. etherwick, it's the impossible that
happens" reoined Matherfield.  "n a beehive like this, where every
man's intent on his own business, ninetynine men out of a hundred
never observe anything unless it's shoved right under their very eyes.
f course, if we could find out if and where annaford and ranett were
together that night, and where ranett went to after he slipped away at
haring ross, it would vastly simplify matters.  ut how are we going
to find out  There's been immense publicity given to this case in the
papers, you know, Mr. etherwickportraits of annaford, and details
about the whole affair, and so on, and yet we've had surprisingly
little help and less information.  'll tell you what it is, sirwhat
we want is that tall, muffledup chap who met annaford at ictoria
ho is he, now"

"ho, indeed" assented etherwick.  "anishedwithout a trace."

"h, well" said Matherfield cheerfully, "you never know when you might
light on a trace.  ut here we are at this unsavoury ligwood's ents."

The cab pulled up at the entrance to a dark, highwalled, stonepaved
alley, which at that moment appeared to be full of women and children
so, too, did the windows on either side.  The whole place was sombre
and evilsmelling, and etherwick felt a sense of pity for the
unfortunate man whose luck had been bad enough to bring him there.

" murder, a suicide, or a sudden death is as a breath of heaven to
these folk" said Matherfield as they made their way through the ragged
and frowsy gathering.  "t's an event in uneventful lives.  ere's the
place," he added, as they came to a doorway whereat a policeman stood
on guard.  "nd here are the stairsmind you don't slip on 'em, for
the wood's broken and the banisters are smashed."

etherwick cautiously followed his guide to the top of the house.
There at another door stood a second policeman, engaged when they
caught sight of him in looking out through the dirtobscured window of
the landing.  is bored countenance brightened when he saw Matherfield
stepping back he uietly opened the door at his side.  nd the two
newcomers, silent in view of the task before them, tiptoed into the
room beyond.

t was, as Matherfield had remarked, a poor place, but it was clean and
orderly, and its occupant had evidently tried to make it as habitable
and comfortable as his means would allow.  There were one or two good
prints on the table half a doen books on an old chest of drawers in
a cracked vase on the mantelpiece there were a few flowers, wilted and
dead.  etherwick took in all this at a glance then he turned to
Matherfield, who silently drew aside a sheet from the head and
shoulders of the rigid figure on the bed, and looked inuiringly at his
companion.  nd etherwick gave the dead man's face one careful
inspection and nodded.

"Yes" he said.  "That's the man"

"ithout doubt" asked Matherfield.

"o doubt at all," affirmed etherwick.  "That is the man who was with
annaford in the train.   knew him instantly."

Matherfield replaced the sheet and turned to a small table which stood
in the window.  n it was a box, a suare, oldfashioned thing, clamped
at the corners.

"This seems to be the only thing he had that's what you may call
private," he observed.  "t's locked, but 've got a tool here that'll
open it.   want to know what's in itthere may be something that'll
give us a clue."

etherwick stood by while Matherfield forced open the lock with an
instrument which he produced from his pocket, and began to examine the
contents of the box.  t first there seemed little that was likely to
yield information.  There was a complete suit of clothes and an outfit
of decent linen it seemed as if ranett had carefully kept these in
view of better days.  There were more books, all of a technical nature,
relating to chemistry there was a small case containing chemical
apparatus, and another in which lay a pair of scales in a third they
found a microscope.

"e wasn't down to the very end of his resources, or he'd have pawned
these things," muttered Matherfield.  "They all look good stuff,
especially the microscope.  ut here's more what  wantletters"

e drew forth two bundles of letters, neatly arranged and tied up with
tape.  nloosing the fastenings and rapidly spreading the envelopes out
on the table, he suddenly put his finger on an address.

"There you are, Mr. etherwick," he exclaimed.  "That's ust what 
expected to find outthough  certainly didn't think we should
discover it so uickly This man has lived at ellithwaite some time or
other.  Look there, at this addressMr. ames ranett, , ictoria
Terrace, ellithwaite, Yorkshire.  f coursethat's how he came to
know and be with annaford.  They were old acuaintances.  ee, there
are several letters."

etherwick took two or three of the envelopes in his hand and looked
closely at them.  e perceived at once what Matherfield had not noticed.

"ust so" he said.  "ut what's of far more importance is the date.
Look at thisyou see  That shows that ranett was living at
ellithwaite ten years agoit was of that time that annaford was
talking to him in the train."

"h, we're getting at something" assented Matherfield.  "ow we'll put
everything back, and 'll take this box away and examine it thoroughly
at leisure."  e replaced the various articles, twisted a cord round
the box, knotted it, and turned to the dead man's clothes, lying neatly
folded on a chair close by.  " haven't had a look at the pockets of
those things yet," he continued.  "'ll ust take a glanceyou never
know."

etherwick again watched in silence.  There was little of interest
revealed until Matherfield suddenly drew a folded bit of paper from one
of the waistcoat pockets.  moothing it out he uttered a sharp
exclamation.

"ood" he said.  "ee this   brand new five pound note  ow, 'll
lay anything he hadn't had that on him long  ot it that night,
doubtless.  ndfrom whom"

" should say annaford gave it to him," suggested etherwick.

ut Matherfield shook his head and put the note in his own pocket.

"That's a definite clue" he said, with emphasis.  " can trace that"




T 

T M TTL

etherwick went away from the sordid atmosphere of ligwood's ents
wondering more than ever at this new development he continued to
wonder and to speculate all the rest of that day and most of the next.
That ranett's sudden death had followed on annaford's seemed to him a
sure proof that there was more behind this mystery than anybody had so
far conceived of.  ersonally, he had not the slightest doubt that
whoever poisoned annaford had also poisoned ranett.  nd he was not
at all surprised when, late in the afternoon of the day following upon
that of the visit to orking, Matherfield walked into his chambers with
a face full of news.

" know what you're going to tell me, Matherfield," said etherwick,
motioning his visitor to an easy chair.  "The doctors have held a
postmortem on ranett, and they find that he was poisoned."

Matherfield's face fell he was robbed of his chance of a dramatic
announcement.

"ell, and that's ust what  was going to tell you," he answered.
"That's what they do say.  ame doctors that performed the autopsy on
annaford.  oesn't surprise you"

"ot in the least," replied etherwick.  " expected it.  They're sure
of it"

"ead certain  ut, as in annaford's case, they're not certain of the
particular poison used.  oweveralso as in his casethey've
submitted the whole case to two big swells in that line, one of 'em the
man that's always employed by the ome ffice in these affairs, and the
other that famous specialist at t. Martha's ospital forget his
name.  They'll get to work they're at work on the annaford case now.
ifficult ob,  understandsome very subtle poison, probably little
known.  owever,  believe we've got a clue about it."

" clueabout the poison" exclaimed etherwick.  "hat clue"

"ell, this," answered Matherfield.  "fter you'd gone away from
ligwood's ents yesterday afternoon, and while  was making
arrangements for the removal of the poor chap's body,  took another
careful look round the room.  ow, if you noticed things as closely as
all that, you may have observed that ranett's bed was partly in a sort
of alcovethe head part.  n the corner of that alcove, or recess,
ust where he could have set them down by reaching his arm out of bed,
 found a bottle and a glass tumbler.  The bottle was an ordinary
medicine bottlenot a very big one.  t had the cork in it and about
an inch of fluid, which, on taking out the cork,  found to be whisky,
and,  should say by the smell, whisky of very good uality.  ut 
noticed that there was the very slightest trace of some sort of
sediment at the bottom.  There was a trace of similar sediment in the
bottom of the tumbler.  ow, of course,  put these things up most
carefully, sealed them, and handed them over to the doctors.  or it
was very evident to mereconstructing things, you knowthat ranett
had mixed himself a drink, a nightcap, if you like to call it so, from
that bottle on getting into bed, and then had put bottle and glass down
by his bedhead, in the corner.  nd ust as  mean to trace that
fivepound note, Mr. etherwick, so  mean to trace that bottle"

"ow" asked etherwick, closely interested.  "nd to what, or whom"

"To the chemists where it came from," answered Matherfield.  "t came
from some chemist's, and 'll find which"

"There are hundreds of chemists in London," said etherwick.  "t's a
stiff proposition."

"t's going to be done, anyway," asserted Matherfield.  "nd it mayn't
be such a stiff ob as it at first looks to be.  ee here  There were
labels on that bottle, both of 'em torn and defaced, it's true, but
still with enough on them to narrow down the field of inuiry.  've
had the face of the bottle photographedhere's a print of the result."

e brought out a photographic print, roughly finished and mounted on a
card, and handed it over to etherwick, who took it to the light and
examined it carefully.  t showed the front of the medicine bottle,
with a label at the top and another at the bottom.  ach had been torn,
as if to obliterate names and addresses, but a good deal of the
lettering was left.



    
        .      , s.,         
        The mix  re as before    
        o. .               
    

    
      ote.This medicine has 
      been dispensed by a fully  
      ualified hemist with the 
              to possible drugs  
                  is guaranteed  
                      wishes of  
                      the res  
                                 
                      M...     
                        t. .. 
    


"That bottom label's the thing, Mr. etherwick," remarked Matherfield.
"Let me get that hiatus filled up with the name and address of the
chemist, and 'll soon find out who . . blank, suire, is  The
chemist is one in the est entral district he's a member of the
harmaceutical ociety he'll have somebody whose initials are . . on
his books he'll recognise the number . of the prescription.  t's
a decided clue and even if there are, as there undoubtedly are, scores
of chemists in the est entral district, 'll run this one down"

etherwick handed back the photograph and began to pace up and down the
room.  uddenly he turned on his visitor, his mind made up to tell him
what he himself had been doing.

"Matherfield," he said, dropping into his chair again and adopting a
tone of confidence, "what do you make of this   meanwhat's your
theory  s it your opinion that the deaths of these two men areso to
speakall of a piece"

"That is my opinion" answered Matherfield with an emphatic nod.  "'ve
no more doubt about it than  have that  see you, Mr. etherwick.  ll
of a piece, to be sure  hoever poisoned annaford poisoned ranett
'll tell you how 've figured it out since the doctors told me, only a
couple of hours since, what their opinion is about ranett.  This way
annaford and ranett knew each other at ellithwaite ten years ago.
That night when ranett left ppleyard in orseferry oad and turned
into ictoria treet, he met annafordaccidentally."

"hy accidentally" asked etherwick.

"ell, that's what  think," said Matherfield.  "'ve figured in that
way.  f course, it may have been by appointment.  ut anyway, they
metwe know that.  ow then, where did they spend their time between
then and the time they got into your carriage at t. ames's ark  e
don't know.  ut here comes in an unknown factorwhat about the
strange man at ictoria, the man muffled to his eyes  Two things
suggest themselves to me, Mr. etherwick.  id annaford take ranett
to see that man, or did annaford and ranett meet at that man's  or
 think that man, whoever he is, is at the bottom of every thing."

"hy should they meet at that man's" asked etherwick.



"ell," answered Matherfield, " think that secret of annaford's has
something to do with it.  e had the sealed packet on him when he left
Malter's otel it had disappeared when we searched his clothing after
his death.  ow, the granddaughter says it had to do with chemicals.
uppose the tall, muffled man was a chap whose business opinion on this
secret annaford wanted, and that they met at ictoria and went to the
man's rooms somewhere in that district  uppose ranettanother man
in the chemistry linecame there, knowing both  upposing the muffled
man poisoned both of 'em, to keep the secret to himself  o you see
what 'm after  ery well  There you are.  The thing is to hunt out
that man, whoever he is.   wish  knew what annaford's secret was,
thoughits precise nature."

"Matherfield," said etherwick, "'ll tell you  You've been very
confidential with me 'll be eually so with you, on condition that we
work together from this.  The fact is, 've been at work.  'm
immensely interested in this case.  ver since  saw annaford die in
that train and in that awfully mysterious fashion it's fascinated me,
and 'm going to the very end of it.  ow 'll tell you all 've been
doing, and what 've discovered.  Listen carefully."

e went on to tell his visitor the whole details of his visit to
ellithwaite, of the results of his investigations there, and of
hona's doings and observations at iversreade ourt.  Matherfield
listened in absorbed silence.

"s Miss annaford going to this secretaryship, then" he demanded
abruptly, at the end of etherwick's story.  "s it settled"

"ractically, yes," replied etherwick.  " heard from Lady iversreade
this morning so did Mr. enthwaite.  e gave Miss annafordto be
known to Lady iversreade as Miss eatherstonevery good
recommendations for the post, and  expect that as soon as she's had
our letters, Lady iversreade will telephone to Miss annaford that
she's to go at once.  Thenshe'll go."

"To act asspy" suggested Matherfield.

"f you put it that way, yes," assented etherwick.  "Though, from what
she saw of her yesterday, Miss annaford formed a very favourable
opinion of Lady iversreade.  owever, 'm so certain that somehow or
other, perhaps innocently, she's connected with this affair, that we
mustn't lose any chance."

"nd Miss annaford will report anything likely to you" asked
Matherfield.

"ust so  Miss annaford's duties don't include any unday work on
unday she'll come to town, and if there's anything to tell, she'll
tell itto me.  he's a smart, clever girl, Matherfield, and she'll
keep her eyes open."

Matherfield nodded, and for a while sat silent, evidently lost in his
own thoughts.

"h, she's a clever girl, right enough" he said suddenly.  "m  
wonder who this Lady iversreade really is, now"

"This Lady iversreade" laughed etherwick.  " multimillionairess"

"ye, ust so but who was she before her marriage  f she is the
woman who was known as Mrs. hittingham"

"an there be any doubt about it after what  found out"

"You never know, Mr. etherwick  Lord bless you they talk about the
long arm of coincidence.  hy, in my time 've known of things that
make me feel there's nothing wonderful about the most amaing
coincidence  utif Lady iversreade used to be Mrs. hittingham,
then 'd like to know all about Mrs. hittingham until she became Lady
iversreade, and who she was before she was Mrs. hittingham, if she
ever was Mrs. hittingham"

"tiff ob, Matherfield," said etherwick.  " think we shall have
enough to do to keep an eye on Lady iversreade."

"You anticipate something there" suggested Matherfield.

" think something may transpire," replied etherwick.

Matherfield got to his feet.

"ell," he said, "keep me informed, and 'll keep you informed.  e've
something to go onLord knows what we shall make out of it"

"You're doing your best to trace the tall man" asked etherwick.

"est" exclaimed Matherfield with an air of disgust.  "e've done our
best and our better than best  've had special men all round that
ictoria district  should think every tall man in that part's been
eyed over.  nd  believe that Mr. Ledbitter has so got the thing on
his brain that he's been spending all his spare time patrolling the
neighbourhood and going in and out of restaurants and saloons looking
for the man he sawof course, without result"

"ll the same," said etherwick, "that man issomewhere"

Matherfield went away, and except at the inuest on ranettwhereat
nothing transpired which was not already knownetherwick did not see
him again for several days.  e himself progressed no further in his
investigations during that time.  hona annaford betook herself to
iversreade ourt, as secretary to its mistress's ome, and until the
unday succeeding his departure etherwick heard nothing of her.  Then
she came up to town on the unday morning and, in accordance with their
previous arrangement, etherwick met her at ictoria, and took her to
lunch at a neighbouring hotel.

"nything to tell" he asked, when they had settled down to their soup.
"ny happenings"

"othing" answered hona.  "verything exceedingly proper,
businesslike, and orderly.  nd Lady iversreade appears to me to be a
model sort of personher devotion to that ome and its inmates is
remarkable   don't believe anything's going to happen, or that 
shall ever have anything to report."

"ell, that'll have its compensations," said etherwick.  "Leave us all
the more time for ourselves, won't it"

e gave her a look to which hona responded, shyly but unmistakably
she knew, as well as he did, that they were getting fond of each
other's society.  nd they continued to meet on undays, and three or
four went by, and still she had nothing to tell that related to the
mystery of annaford and ranett.

Three weeks elapsed before Matherfield had anything to tell, either.
Then he walked into etherwick's chambers one morning with news in his
face.

"Traced it" he said.  "new  should  That fivepound notebrand
new.  nly a uestion of time to do that, of course."

"ell" inuired etherwick.

"t was one of twenty fivers paid by the cashier of the London and
ountry ank in iccadilly to the secretary of ivian's," continued
Matherfield.  "ateday before annaford's death.  ivian's, let me
tell you, is a swell night club.  ow then, how did that note get into
the hands of ranett  That's going to be a stiff 'un"

"o stiff that 'm afraid you mustn't ask me to go in at it," agreed
etherwick goodhumouredly.  " must stick to my own linewhen the
chance comes."

The chance came on the following unday, when, in pursuance of now
established custom, he met hona.  he gave him a significant look as
soon as she got out of the train.

"ewsat last" she said, as they turned up the platform.
"omething's happenedbut what it means  don't know."




T 

T MYT T

The headwaiter in the restaurant to which etherwick and hona
repaired every unday immediately upon her arrival now knew these two
well by sight, and forming his own conclusions about them, always
reserved for them a table in a uiet and secluded corner.  ither they
now proceeded, and had scarcely taken their accustomed seats before
hona plunged into her story.

" expect you want to know what it's all about, so  won't keep you
waiting," she said.  "t was on ridayriday morningthat it
happened, and  half thought of writing to you about it that evening.
Then  thought it best to tell you personally todaybesides,  should
have had to write an awfully long letter.  There are things to explain
'd better explain them first.  ur arrangements down there at
iversreade, for instance.  They're like this Lady iversreade and 
always breakfast together at the ourt, about nine o'clock.  t ten we
go across the grounds to the ome.  There we have a sort of formal
officetwo rooms, one of which, the first opening from the hall, 
have, the other, opening out of it, is Lady iversreade's private
sanctum.  n the hall itself we have an exarmy man, Mitchell, as
hallporter, to attend to the door and so on.  ll the morning we are
busy with letters, accounts, reports of the staff, and that sort of
thing.  e have lunch at the ome, and we're generally busy until four
or five o'clock.  ot all that"

"very scrap" replied etherwick.  "erfectly plain."

"ery well," continued hona.  "ne more detail, however.   good many
people, chiefly medical men and folk interested in homes and hospitals,
call, wanting to look over and to know about the placewhich,  may
tell you in parenthesis, costs Lady iversreade a pretty tidy penny
Mitchell's instructions as regards all callers are to bring their cards
to me interview them first if  can deal with them,  do if 
think it necessary or desirable,  take them in to Lady iversreade.
e have to sort them outsome,  am sure, come out of mere idle
curiosity in fact, the only visitors we want to see there are either
medical men who have a genuine interest in the place and can do
something for it, or people who are connected with its particular
inmates.  ell, on riday morning last, about a uarter to twelve, as 
was busy with my letters,  heard a car come up the drive, and
presently Mitchell came into my room with a card bearing the name r.
yprian aseverie.  nstead of being an engraved card as, by all the
recognised standards, it should have been, it was a printed cardthat
was the first thing  noticed."

"Your powers of observation," remarked etherwick admiringly, "are
excellent, and should prove most useful."

"Thank you for the complimentbut that didn't need much observation,"
retorted hona with a laugh.  "t was obvious.  owever,  asked
Mitchell what r. aseverie wanted Mitchell replied that the gentleman
desired an interview with Lady iversreade.  ow, as  said before, we
never refuse doctors, so  told Mitchell to bring r. aseverie to me.
 moment later r. aseverie entered.   want to describe him
particularly, and you must listen most attentively.  igure, then, to
yourself a man of medium height, neither stout nor slender, but
comfortably plump, and apparently about fortyfive years of age,
dressed very correctly and fashionably in a black morning coat and
vest, dark striped trousers, immaculate as to linen and neckwear, and
furnished with a new silk hat, pearlgrey gloves and a tightly rolled
goldmounted umbrella.  ncidentally, he wore a thin gold watchchain,
white spats and highly polished shoes.  ot that"

" see himhis clothes and things,  mean," assented etherwick.
"ashionable medico sort, evidently  uthimself"

"ow his face," continued hona.  "magine a man with an almost
absolutely bloodless countenancea face the colour of old
ivorylighted by a pair of peculiarly piercing eyes, black as sloes,
and the pallor of the face heightened by a rather heavy black moustache
and eually black, slightly crinkled hair, thick enough above the ears
but becoming sparse and thin on the crown.  magine, too, a pair of
full, red lips above a round but determined chin and a decidedly hooked
nose, and you havethe man 'm describing"

"m" said etherwick reflectingly.  "ebraic,  think, from your
description."

"That's ust what  thought myself," agreed hona.  " said to myself
at once, 'hatever and whoever else you are, my friend, you're a ew'
ut the creature's manner and speech were nglish enoughvery nglish.
e had all the wellaccustomed air of the medical practitioner who is
also a bit of a man of the world, and  saw at once that anybody who
tried to fence with him would usually come off secondbest.  is
explanation of his presence was reasonable and commonplace enough he
was deeply interested in the sort of cases we had in the ome, and
desired to acuaint himself with our methods and arrangements and so
on.  e made use of a few technical terms and phrases which were uite
beyond my humble powers, and  carried in his card to Lady iversreade.
Lady iversreade is always accessible when there's a doctor in the
case, and in two minutes r. aseverie was closeted with her."

"That ends the first chapter,  suppose" said etherwick.
"nterestingvery   good curtain  nd the next"

"The events of the second chapter," replied hona, "took place in Lady
iversreade's room, and  cannot even guess at their nature.   can
only tell of things that  know.  ut there's a good deal in that.  To
begin with, although r. aseverie had said to me that he desired to
see the omewhich, of course, in the ordinary way meant his being
either taken round by Lady iversreade or by our resident house
physicianhe was not taken round.  e never left that room from the
moment he entered it until the moment in which he left it.  nd he
remained in it an entire hour"

"ith Lady iversreade"

"ith Lady iversreade  he never left it, either.  or did  go into
it she hates me to go in if she has anybody with her at any time.
othere those two were together, from ten minutes to twelve until
five minutes to one.  Yet the man had said that he wanted to look
round"

"s there any other way by which they could have left that room"
suggested etherwick.  "nother dooror a rench window"

"There is nothing of the sort.  The door into my room is the only means
of entrance or exit to or from Lady iversreade's.  othey were there
all the time."

"id you hear anything"

"othing  The house in which Lady iversreade set up this ome is an
old, solid, wellbuilt onenone of your modern gimcrack work in
itit's a far better house than the ourt, grand as that may be.  ll
the doors and windows fit never heard a sound from the room."

"ell," asked etherwick, after due meditation, "and at the end of the
hour"

"t the end of the hour the door suddenly opened and r. aseverie
appeared, hat, gloves and umbrella in hand.  e half turned as he came
out and said a few words to Lady iversreade.   heard them.  e said,
'ell, then, next riday morning at the same time'  Then he nodded,
stepped into my room, closed the door behind him, made me a very
polite, smiling bow as he passed my desk, and went out.   moment later
he drove off in the carit had been waiting at the entrance all that
time."

" suppose that's the end of chapter two," suggested etherwick.  "s
there more"

"ome," responded hona.  "uring the hour which r. aseverie had
spent with Lady iversreade  had been very busy typing letters.  hen
he had gone  took them into her room, so that she could sign them.  
suppose  was a bit curious about what had ust happened and may have
been more than usually observantanyway,  felt certain that the visit
of this man, whoever he is, had considerably upset Lady iversreade.
he looked it."

"recisely how" inuired etherwick.

"ell,  couldn't exactly tell you.  erhaps a man wouldn't have
noticed it.  ut being a woman,  did.  he was perturbedshe'd been
annoyed, or distressed, or surprised, orsomething.   saw signs
which, as a woman, were unmistakableto a woman.  The man's visit had
been distastefultroubling.  'm as certain of that as  am that this
is roast mutton."

"id she say anything"

"ot one word.  he was unusually taciturnsilent, in fact.  he took
the letters in silence, signed them in silence.  o, on reflection, she
never spoke a word while  was in the room.   took the letters away
and began putting them in their envelopes.  oon afterwards Lady
iversreade came through my room and went out, and  saw her go across
the grounds to the ourt.  he didn't turn up at the usual luncheon at
the ome, and  didn't see her again that afternoon.  n fact,  didn't
see her again that day, for when  went home to the ourt at five
o'clock, Lady iversreade's maid told me that her mistress had gone up
to town and wouldn't be home until late that night.   went to bed
before she returned."

"ext morning" suggested etherwick.

"ext morning she was ust as usual, and things went on in the usual
way."

"id she ever mention this man and his visit to you" asked etherwick.

"onot a word of him.  ut  found out something about him myself on
riday afternoon."

"hat  omething relevant"

"May be relevant tosomething.   was wondering about himand his
printed card.   thought it odd that a medical man, so smartly dressed
and all that, should present a card like thatnot one well printed, a
cheap thing  esides, it had no address.   wonderedmere
inuisitiveness, perhapswhere the creature came from.  ow, we've a
olly good lot of the usual referencebooks there at the omeand
there's a firstclass right uptodate medical directory amongst them.
o  looked up the name of r. yprian aseverie.   say, looked it
upbut  didn't do thatfor it wasn't there  e's neither an
nglish, nor a cottish, nor an rish medical man."

"oreigner, then," said etherwick.  "rench, perhaps, ormerican."

"May be an gyptian, or a ersian, or a urasian, for anything  know,"
remarked hona.  "hat  know is that he's not on the list in that
directory, though from his speech and manner you'd think he'd been
practising in the est nd all his life  nyway, that's the story.  s
there anything in it"

etherwick picked up his glass of claret by its stem and looked
thoughtfully through the contents of the bowl.

"The particular thing isthe extent and uality of Lady iversreade's
annoyance, or dismay, or perturbation, occasioned by the man's visit,"
he said at last.  "f she was really very much upset"

"f you want my honest opinion as eyewitness and as woman," remarked
hona, "Lady iversreade was very much upset.  he gave me the
impression that she'd ust received very bad, disconcerting, unpleasant
news.  fter seeing and watching her as she signed the letters  had no
doubt whatever that the man had deliberately lied to me when he said he
wanted to see the ome and its workingwhat he really wanted was
access to Lady iversreade."

"Look here" exclaimed etherwick suddenly "ere you present when this
man went into Lady iversreade's room"

"resent  f course  was   took him inmyself."

"You saw them meet"

"To be sure"

"ell, then, you know  ere they strangers  id she recognise him
id she show any sign of recognition whatever when she set eyes on him"

"o, none  'm perfectly certain she'd never seen the man before in
her life   could see uite well that he was an absolute stranger to
her."

"nd she to him"

"h, that  don't know  e may have seen her a thousand times.  ut
'm sure she'd never seen him."

etherwick laid down his knife and fork with a gesture of finality.

"'m going to find out who that chap is," he answered.  "ot to"

"You think his visit may have something to do with this" asked hona.

"May, yes.  nyway, 'm not going to let any chance go.  There's enough
mystery in what you tell me about the man to make it worth while
following him up.  t must be done."

"ow will you do it"

"You say he said that he was going there again next riday at the same
time  ell, the thing to do, then, is to watch and follow him when he
goes away."

"'m afraid 'm no use for that  e'd know me."

"or am 'm too conspicuous," laughed etherwick.  "f  were a
head and shoulders shorter,  might be some use.  ut 've got the very
manmy clerk, one Mapperley.  e's ust the sort to follow and dog
anybody and yet never be seen himself.  s you'll say, when you've the
pleasure of seeing him, Mapperley's the most ordinary, commonplace chap
you ever set eyes onpass absolutely unnoticed in any ockney crowd.
ut he's as sharp as they make 'em, veiling a peculiar astuteness under
his eminently undistinguished features.  nd what  shall do is
this'll give Mapperley a full and detailed description of r.
yprian aseverie 've memorised yours already Mapperley will
memorise mine.  ow aseverie, whoever he may be, will probably go down
to orking by the . from here so will Mapperley.  nd after
Mapperley has once spotted his man, he'll not lose sight of him."

"nd he'll dowhat" asked hona.

"ollow him to orkingwatch himfollow him back to Londonfind out
where he goes when he returnsrun him to earth, in fact.  Then he'll
report to meand we shall know more than we do now, and also what to
do next."

" wonder what it's all going to lead to" said hona.  "retty much of
a mae, isn't it"

"t is," agreed etherwick.  "ut if we can only get a firm hold on a
thread"

"nd that might break" she laughed.

"ell, then, one that won't break," he said.  "There are several loose
ends lying about already.  Matherfield's got a hold on one or two."

e went to see Matherfield next morning and told him the story that he
had heard from hona.  Matherfield grew thoughtful.

"ell, Mr. etherwick," he said, after a pause, "it's as 've said
beforeif this Lady iversreade is mixed up in it, the thing to do is
to go back and get as full a history as can possibly be got of her
antecedents.  e'll have to get on to thatbut we'll wait to see what
that clerk of yours discovers about this man.  There may be something
in itin the meantime 'm hard at work on my own clues."

"ny luck" asked etherwick.

"carcely that.  ut, as  say, we're at work.  The fivepound note is
a difficult matter.  iven in change, of course, at ivian's ight
lubbut they tell me there that it's no uncommon thing to change ten,
twenty, and even fiftypound notes for their customersit's a swell
lot who forgather thereand of course they've no recollection whatever
about that particular note or night.  till, the fact remainsthat
note came through ivian's, and through one of its freuenters, to
ranett, and 'm in hopes."

"nd the medicine bottle" suggested etherwick.

"h, there is more chance" responded Matherfield, with a lightening
eye.  "That's only a uestion of time  've got a man going round all
the chemists in the est entral districtstiff ob, for there are
more of 'em than  believed.  ut he's bound to hit on the right one
eventually.  nd thenwell, we shall have a pretty good idea, if not
positive proof, as to how ranett got hold of the stuff that poisoned
him."

" suppose there's no doubt that there was poison in that bottle"
inuired etherwick.

"ccording to the specialists, none," replied Matherfield.  "nd in the
glass too.  hat sort of poison,  don't knowyou know what these
experts areso mysterious about things  ut they have told me
thisthe stuff that settled ranett was identical with that which
finished off annaford.  That's certain."

"Then it probably came from the same source," said etherwick.

"h, my notion is that the man or men who poisoned one man poisoned the
other," exclaimed Matherfield.  "nd at the same time.  t least, 
think ranett got his dose at the same timeprobably carried it off in
his pocket and drank it when he got home.  utwe shall trace that
bottle  Let me know what you find out about this man aseverie, Mr.
etherwickevery little helps."

etherwick duly coached Mapperley in the part he wanted him to play,
and Mapperley, with money in his pockets and a pipe in his mouth,
lounged off to ictoria on the following riday morning.  is principal
saw nothing and heard nothing of him all that day.




T 

LY 

s etherwick was breakfasting next morning, Mapperley, outwardly
commonplace and phlegmatic as ever, walked into his room.

"rief outline first, Mapperley," commanded etherwick, instinctively
scenting news.  "etails later.  ell"

"potted him at once at ictoria," said Mapperley.  "ollowed him down
there.  e was at iversreade an hour.  Then went back to orkinghad
lunch at 'ed Lion.'  e stopped there till four o'clock, lunching and
idling.  ent back to town by the ., arriving ..   followed him
then to the af de aris.  e dined there and hung about till past
ten.  nd then he went to ivian's ight lub."

etherwick pricked up his ears at that.  ivian's ight lubhere, at
any rate, seemed to be a link in the chain of which Matherfield
believed himself to hold at least one end.  The fivepound note found
on ranett had been traced to ivian's ight lub now Mapperley had
tracked Lady iversreade's mysterious visitor to the same resort.

"To ivian's ight lub, eh, Mapperley" he said.  "Let's seewhere
is that"

"ntrance is in andlestick assage, off t. Martin's Lane," replied
Mapperley with promptitude.  "lub's on first floorolly fine suite
of rooms, too"

"You've been in it" suggested etherwick.

"Twice  ot last night, though.  You didn't give me any further orders
than to see where he went finally, after returning to town.  o, when
'd run him to earth at ivian's,  went home.   argued that if he was
wanted further, ivian's would find him."

"ll right, Mapperley.  ut before that  You followed him to
iversreade ourt"

Mapperley grinned widely.

"o did better than that.   was there before himmuch better
that, than following.   spotted him uick enough at ictoria, and made
sure he got into the ..  Then  got in.  s soon as we got to
orking,  umped out, got outside the station and chartered a taxi and
drove off to iversreade ourt.   made the driver hide his cab up the
road  laid low in the plantation opposite the entrance gates.
resently my lord came along and drove up to the house.  e was there
the best part of an hour then he drove off again towards orking.  
followed at a good distance kept him in sight, all the same.  e got
out of his conveyance in the igh treet so did .  e went into the
ed Lion so did .  e had lunch there so had .  fter that he
lounged about in the smokingroom  kept an eye on him."

" suppose he didn't meet anybody"

"obody"

"ell, and at the af de aris  id he meet anybody there"

"e exchanged a nod and a word here and there with menand womenthat
came in and went out.  ut as to any arranged meeting,  should say
not.   should say, too, that he was well known at the af de aris."

"id he seem to be a man of means  You know what  mean"

"e did himself very well at lunch and dinner, anyway," said Mapperley,
with another grin.  "ottle of claret at orking, and a pint of
champagne at the af de arisbig cigars, too.  That sort of man, you
know."

etherwick considered matters a moment.

"ow do you get in to this ivian's ight lub" he asked suddenly.

"ay" answered Mapperley laconically.  "t the door.  ome nonsense
about being proposed, but that's all bosh  Two of you gosay rown
and mith.  rown proposes mith and mith proposes rown.  ll rot
nybody can get inwith money."

"nd what goes on there"

"ancing  rinking  evilry  uite respectable, though," replied
Mapperley.  "een no prosecutions, anywayso far."

"hat time does it open"

"ine o'clock," answered Mapperley, with a suggestive grin.  "n the
old days it didn't open till after the theatres.  ut nowearlier."

"eally not a nightclub at allin the old acceptation of the term,"
suggested etherwick.  "vening, really"

"That's about it," agreed Mapperley.  "nyhow, it's ivian's."

or the second time in the course of his investigations, etherwick's
thoughts turned to oxley.  oxley's love of intimate acuaintance with
all sides of London life had doubtless led him to look in at ivian's
he would ask oxley for some further information.  nd he looked up
oxley at the club.

oxley knew ivian's well enoughinnocent and innocuous now, said
oxley, what with all these new regulations and so on degenerated,
indeedor improved, ust whichever way you regarded itinto a supper
club and that sort of thing.  ancingoh yes, there was dancing, and
so onbut things had alteredaltered.

"ell,  don't want to dance there, nor to go there at all, for that
matter, unless 'm obliged to," said etherwick.  "hat  want to know
is something about a man who,  believe, freuents the placea
somewhat notable man."

"escribe him" commanded oxley.

etherwick retailed hona's description of aseverie oxley nodded.

" know that manby sight," he said.  "een him there.   believe he's
something to do with the proprietorship that place is owned by a small
syndicate.  ut  don't know his name.  've seen him outside
tooround about Leicester uare and its purlieus."

etherwick went from oxley to Matherfield and told him the result of
Mapperley's work.

" know ivian's, of course," said Matherfield.  "een in there two or
three times lately in relation to this fivepound note.  on't remember
seeing this man, though.  ut in view of what your clerk says, 'd like
to see him.  ome with me.  e'll go tonight."

"Make it Monday," suggested etherwick.  "Tomorrow, unday,  shall be
meeting Miss annaford again, and before we go to ivian's 'd like to
know if she has anything to tell about the last visit of aseverie to
iversreade ourtthe visit that Mapperley watched yesterday.  he may
have."

"Monday night then," agreed Matherfield.  " don't know what we can
expect, but 'd certainly like to know who this man is and why he goes
to Lady iversreade."

"o good, you may be sure" said etherwick.  "ut we'll ferret it
outsomehow."

"dd, that things seem to be centring round ivian's" mused
Matherfield.  "The fiverand now this.  ellMonday evening
thenperhaps Miss annaford can supply a bit of extra news tomorrow."

etherwick, meeting hona at ictoria next day, found his arm grasped
in hona's right hand and himself twisted round.

"f you want to see Lady iversreade in the flesh, there she is"
whispered hona.  "ame up by the same trainthere, going towards the
bookstall a tall man with her"

t that moment Lady iversreade turned to speak to a porter who was
carrying some light luggage for her, and etherwick had a full and good
view of her face and figure.   fine, handsome, capablelooking woman,
he said to himself, and one that once seen would not easily be
forgotten.

"ho's the man" he asked, looking from Lady iversreade to her
companion, a tall, broned man of military appearance, and apparently
of about her own age.

"Maor enteney," replied hona promptly.  "e's a friend of hers, who
takes a tremendous interest in the omein fact, he acts as a sort of
representative of it here in town.  e's often down at the ourt
believe he's in love with her."

"ellmatched couple," observed etherwick, as the two people under
notice moved away towards the exit.  "nd what's Lady iversreade come
up for"

"h,  don't know that," replied hona.  "he never tells me anything
about her private doings.   heard her say that she was going to Town
this morning and shouldn't be back until Tuesday, but that's all 
know."

"That man, aseverie, came again on riday" suggested etherwick.
"ut  know he didMapperley watched him.  nything happen"

"othingexcept that Lady iversreade told me that if r. aseverie
called he was to be brought in to her at once," answered hona.  "e
came at the same time as before, and was with her an hour."

"ny signs on her part of being further upset" asked etherwick.

"oon the contrary she seemed uite cool and collected after he'd
gone," said hona.  "f course she made no reference to his visit."

"as she never mentioned him to you"

"ever  n spite of the fact that his professed obect was to see the
ome and the patients, he's seen neither."

"hich shows that that was all a mere excuse to get speech with her"
muttered etherwick.  "ellwe're going to find out who this r.
aseverie is  Matherfield and  intend to get in touch with him
tomorrow night."

ut when the next night came etherwick's plans about the visit to
ivian's were frustrated by an unexpected happening, and neither he nor
Matherfield as much as crossed the threshold of the nightclub in
andlestick assage.  They went there at ten o'clock that, said
Matherfield, was a likely hourbetween then and eleventhirty the
place would be full of its habitual freuenters the notion was to
mingle unobtrusively with whatever crowd chanced to be there and to
keep eyes and ears open for whatever happened to transpire.

andlestick assage, unfamiliar to etherwick until that evening,
proved to be one of the many narrow alleys which open out of t.
Martin's Lane in the neighbourhood of the theatres.  t wore a very
commonplace, not to say shabby complexion, and there was nothing in its
atmosphere to suggest adventure or romance.  ot was there anything
alluring about the entrance to ivian's, which was merely a wide,
double doorway, ornamented by two evergreen shrubs set in tubs and
revealing swingdoors within, and a carpeted staircase beyond.
etherwick and Matherfield, however, never reached swingdoors or
staircase as they approached the outer entrance a tall woman emerged,
and without so much as a look right or left turned down the passage
towards the street.  he paid no attention to the two men as she walked
uickly past thembut etherwick softly seied his companion's arm.

"Lady iversreade, by all that's wonderful" he exclaimed under his
breath.  "That woman"

Matherfield turned sharply, gaing after the retreating figure.

"That," he said incredulously, "coming out of here  ertain"

"ead sure" affirmed etherwick.  " knew her at once'd had a
particularly good look at her, yesterday.  That's she"

"hat's she doing at ivian's" muttered Matherfield.  "ueer, that"

"ut she's going away from it," said etherwick.  "ome onlet's see
where she goes.  e can easily come back here.  ut why not follow her
first"

"ood" agreed Matherfield.  "ome on then easily keep her in sight."

Lady iversreade at that moment was turning out of the passage, to her
left hand.  hen the two men emerged from it, she was already several
yards ahead, going towards t. Martin's hurch.  er tall figure made
her good to follow, but Matherfield kept etherwick back no use, he
said, in pressing too closely on your uarry.

"Tall as she is and tall as we are," he whispered, as they threaded in
out of the crowds on the pavement, "we can spot her at twenty yards.
autiously, nowshe's making for the cab rank"

They watched Lady iversreade charter and enter a taxicab in another
minute it moved away.  ut it had scarcely moved when Matherfield was
at the door of the next cab on the rank.

"You saw that cab go off with a tall woman in it" he said to the
driver.  "Thereust rounding the corner, know its driver
ightfollow it carefully.  ote where it stops, and if the woman
gets out.  rive slowly past wherever that is, and then pull up a bit
farther on.  e sharp, nowthis is" he bent towards the man and
whispered a word or two a second later he and etherwick were in the
cab and across the top side of Trafalgar uare.

"This is getting a bit thick, Mr. etherwick," remarked Matherfield.
"Your clerk tracks his man to ivian's on riday night, we find Lady
iversreade coming out of ivian's on Monday night.  ow  shouldn't
think Lady iversreade, whom we hear of chiefly as a humanitarian, a
likely sort of lady to visit ivian's"

"he came out of ivian's, anyway" replied etherwick.

"Then, of course, she'd been in" said Matherfield.  "ut why  
should sayto have a meeting with aseverie, or with somebody
representing him, or having something to do with the business that took
him to iversreade ourt.  hat business is it  as it anything to do
with our business  owever, there's Lady iversreade in that cab in
front, and we'll ust follow her to find out where she goesno doubt
she's bound for some swell est nd hotel.  nd that knowledge will be
useful, for  may want to see her in the morningto ask a uestion or
two."

"omewhat early for that, isn't it" suggested etherwick.  "o we know
enough"

"epends on what you call enough," replied Matherfield dryly.  "hat 
know is this that man ranett was poisoned.  e had on him a brand new
fivepound note.  That note 've traced as far as ivian's, where it
was certainly paid to some customer in change on the very day before
ranett and annaford's deaths ivian's is accordingly a place of
interest.  ow  hear of a mysterious man visiting Lady
iversreadethe man is tracked to ivian's myself see Lady
iversreade emerging from ivian's.   think  must ask Lady
iversreade what she knows about ivian's and a certain r. aseverie,
and, incidentally, if she ever heard of a place called ellithwaite and
a policesuperintendent named annaford  h  ut we're leaving the
region of the fashionable hotels."

etherwick looked out of the window, what he saw seemed unfamiliar.

"e're going up dgware oad," said Matherfield.  e leaned out of the
cab and gave some further instructions to the driver.  " don't want to
arouse any suspicion there in front," he remarked, dropping into his
seat again.  "The probability is that she's going to some private
house, and  don't want her to get any idea that she's followed.
hnow we turn into arrow oad."

The cab went away by addington reen, turned sharply at the Town all,
and made up t. Mary's Terrace.  resently it slowed down proceeded
still more slowly passed the other cab which had come to a standstill
in front of a block of high buildings a few yards farther on it
stopped altogether.  The driver got down from his seat and came to the
door.

"That tall lady" he said confidentially.  "er as got into the other
cab.  he's gone into t. Mary's Mansionsust below."

"lats, aren't they" asked Matherfield.

"That's it, sir," answered the driver.  e looked down the street.
"ab's going off again, sir.  orter came out and paid."

"That looks as if she was going to stay here awhile," remarked
Matherfield in an undertone.  "ell, we'll get out, too, and take a
look round."  e paid and dismissed the driver, and crossing over to
the opposite side of the roadway, pointed out to etherwick the block
of flats into which Lady iversreade had disappeared.  "ig place," he
muttered.  "egular rabbitwarren.  owever, no other entrance than
thisthe old burial ground's at the back, no way out there,  do know
that  o she can't very well vanish that way."

"You're going to wait, then" asked etherwick.

" don't believe in starting out on any game unless  see it through,"
replied Matherfield.  "Yes,  think we'll wait.  ut there's no
necessity to hang around in the open street.   know this
districtused to be at the police station round the corner.  You see
all these houses on this side, Mr. etherwick  They're all
lodginghouses, and  know most of their keepers.  ait here a minute,
and 'll soon get a room that we can watch from, without being seen
ourselves."

e left etherwick standing under the shadow of a neighbouring high
wall, and went a little way down the street.  etherwick heard him open
the gate of one of the little gardens and knock at a door.  There some
little delay.  etherwick passed the time in staring at the long rows
of lighted windows in the flats opposite, wondering to which of them
Lady iversreade had gone and what she was doing there at all.  t was
clear to him that this was some adventure connected with the mysterious
aseverie and with ivian's ight lubbut how, and of what nature

Matherfield came back presently, cheerful and reassuring.

"ome along, Mr. etherwick" he whispered.  "There's a man
herelodginghouse keeperwho knows me.  e can have his front
parlour window to watch from.  ar better that than patrolling the
street.  e shall be comfortable there."

"You're intent on watching, then" said etherwick as they moved off.

"'m not coming all that way for nothing," replied Matherfield.  "'m
going to follow her up till she settles for the night.  That won't be
here she'll be off to some hotel or other before long."

ut Matherfield's prediction proved to be faulty.  Time dragged slowly
by in the stuffy and shabby little room in which he and etherwick took
up a position and from the window of which Matherfield kept a constant
watch on the entrance of the flats, exactly opposite.  Midnight came
and went, but nothing happened.  nd at halfpast twelve etherwick
suggested that the game wasn't worth the candle, and that he should
prefer to depart.

"You do as you like, Mr. etherwick," said Matherfield, stifling a
suspicious yawn.  "'m sick enough of it, too.  ut here  stop till
she comes outwhether it's this side of breakfast or the other side"

"nd what then" asked etherwick, half derisively.

"Then we'll seeor 'll see, if you're goingwhere she goes next
on't believe in half measures" retorted Matherfield.

"h, 'll see it out" said etherwick.  "fter all, it'll be daylight
soon."

aylight came over the housetops at four o'clock.  They had seen
nothing up to then.  ut at twenty minutes to five Matherfield tugged
his companion's arm.  Lady iversreade, in a big ulster travellingcoat
and carrying a small suitcase, was emerging alone from the opposite
door.




T 

L MM LTLL

The woman thus observed marched swiftly away down the deserted street
in the direction of the Town all at the corner, and Matherfield, after
one more searching look at her, dropped the slat of the enetian blind
through which he had been peeping, and turned on his companion.  t the
same instant he reached a hand for his overcoat and hat.

"ow, Mr. etherwick," he said sharply, "this has got to be a oneman
ob  There'll be nothing extraordinary in one man going along the
streets to catch an early morning train, but it would look a bit
suspicious if two men went together on the same errand and the same
track  'm off after her  'll run her down  'm used to that sort
of thing.  You go to your chambers and get some sleep.  'll look in
later and tell you what news  have.  harp's the word, now"

e was out of the room and the house within the next few seconds, and
etherwick, half vexed with himself for having lingered there on a ob
which Matherfield thus unceremoniously took into his own hands,
prepared to follow.  resently he went out into the shabby hall the
man of the house was ust coming downstairs, stifling a big yawn.  e
smiled knowingly when he saw etherwick.

"Matherfield gone, sir" he inuired.  " heard the door close."

"e's gone," assented etherwick.  "The person he wanted appeared
suddenly, and he's gone in pursuit."

The man, a smugfaced, easygoing sort of person, smiled again.

"um doings these police have" he remarked.  "ueer ob, watching all
night through a window.   was ust coming down to make you a cup of
coffee," he continued.  "'ll get you one in a few minutes, if you
like.  r tea now  erhaps you'd prefer tea"

"t's very good of you," said etherwick.  "ut to tell you the truth
'd rather get home and to bed.  Many thanks, all the same."

Then, out of sheer good nature, he slipped a treasury note into the
man's hand, and, bidding him good morning, went away.  e, too, walked
down the street in the direction taken by Lady iversreade and her
pursuer.  ut when he came to the bottom and emerged into arrow oad
he saw nothing of them, either to left or right.  The road, however,
was not deserted there were already workmen going to early morning
tasks, and close by the corner of the Town all a roadman was busy with
his broom.  etherwick went up to him.

"id you see a lady, and then a gentleman, come down here, from t.
Mary's Terrace, ust now" he asked.  "Tall people, both of them."

The man rested on his broom, half turned, and pointed towards
addington ridge.

" see 'em, guv'nor," he answered.  "Tall lady, carrying a little
portmantle.  one along over the bridge yonder.  addington station
way.  nd, after her, Matherfield."

"h, you know him, do you" exclaimed etherwick, in surprise.

The man erked a thumb in the direction of the adacent police station.

"sed to be a sergeant here, did Matherfield," he replied.  " knows
him, right enough  nce run me inme an' a mate o' minefor bein' a
bit festive like.  ive bob and costs that was.  ut  don't bear him
no grudge, not me  Thank 'ee, guv'nor."

etherwick left another tip behind him and walked slowly off towards
dgware oad.  The Tube trains were ust beginning to run, and he
caught a southbound one and went down to haring ross and thence to
the Temple.  nd at six o'clock he tumbled into bed, and slept soundly
until, four hours later, he heard Mapperley moving about in the
adoining room.

Mapperley, whose ob at etherwick's was a good deal of a sinecure, was
leisurely reading the news when his master entered.  e laid the paper
aside, and gave etherwick a knowing glance.

"ot some more information last night," he said.  "bout that chap 
tracked the other day."

"ow did you get it" asked etherwick.

"ut in a bit of time at ivian's," answered Mapperley.  "There's a
fellow there that  know.  lerk to the secretary chap, named lowers.
That man aseverie has a share in the placesort of director,  think."

"hat time were you at ivian's" inuired etherwick.  "Late or early"

"arlyfor them," answered Mapperley.

"id you see the man there"

" did.  e was there all the time  was.  n and about all the time.
ut at first he was in what seemed to be serious conversation with a
tall, handsome woman.  They sat talking in an alcove in the lounge
there some time.  Then she went offalone."

"h, you saw that, did you" said etherwick.  "ell,  may as well
tell you, since you know what you do, that the woman was Lady
iversreade"

"h,  guessed that" remarked Mapperley.  " figured in that at once.
ut that wasn't all.   found out more.  That dead man, annafordfrom
what  heard from lowers've no doubt whatever that annaford was at
ivian's once, if not twice, during the two or three nights before his
death.  nyway, lowers recognised my description of himwhich 'd
got, of course, from you and the papers."

"annaford.  There, eh" exclaimed etherwick.  "lone"

"ocame in with this aseverie.  They don't know him as r. aseverie
there, though.  lain Mister.  'm uite sure it was annaford who was
with him."

"id you get the exact datesand times" asked etherwick.

" didn't.  lowers couldn't say that.  ut he remembered such a man."

"ell, that's something," said etherwick.  e turned into another room
and sat down to his breakfast, thinking.  "Mapperley, come here" he
called presently.  "Look here," he went on as the clerk came in.
"ince you know this ivian place, go there again tonight, and try to
find out if that friend of yours knows anything of a tall man who
corresponds to the description of the man whom annaford was seen to
meet at ictoria.  You read Ledbitter's account of that, given at the
inuest"

"Yes," replied Mapperley.  "ut of what value is it  onefor
practical purposes  e couldn't even tell the shape of the man's nose,
nor the colour of his eyes  ll he could tell was that he saw a man
muffled in such a fashion that he saw next to nothing of his face, and
that he was tall and smartly dressed.  There are a few tens of
thousandsscores, perhapsof tall, smartlydressed men in London"

"ever mindinuire," said etherwick, "and particularly if such a man
has ever been seen in aseverie's company there."

e finished his breakfast, and then, instead of going down to the
entral riminal ourt, after his usual habit, he hung about in his
chambers, expecting Matherfield.  ut Matherfield did not come, and at
noon etherwick, impelled by a new idea, left a message for him in case
he called, and went out.  n pursuance of the idea, he ourneyed once
more to the regions of addington and knocked at the door of the house
wherein he and Matherfield had kept watch on the flats opposite.

The lodginghouse keeper opened the door himself and grinned on seeing
etherwick.  etherwick stepped inside and nodded at the door of the
room which he had left only a few hours before.

" want a word or two with you," he said.  "n private."

"obody in here, sir," replied the man.  "ome in."

e closed the door on himself and his visitor, and offered etherwick a
chair.

" expected you'd be back during the day," he said, with a sly smile.
"ither you or Matherfield, or both"

"You haven't seen him again" asked etherwick.

"o he's not been here," replied the man.

"ell,  wanted to ask you a uestion," continued etherwick.  "erhaps
two or three.  To begin with, have you lived here long"

"een here since before these flats were builtand that's a good many
years ago  can't say exactly how many," said the other, glancing at
the big block opposite his window.  "Twentytwo or three, anyway."

"Then  dare say you know most of the people hereabouts" suggested
etherwick.  "y sight, at any rate."

The lodginghouse keeper smiled and shook his head.

"That would be a tall order, mister" he answered.  "There's a few
thousand of people packed into this bit of London.  f course,  do
know a good many, close at hand.  ut if you're a Londoner you'll know
that Londoners keep themselves to themselves.  May seem ueer, but it's
a fact that  don't know the names of my nextdoor neighbours on either
sidethough to be sure they've only been here a few years in either
case."

"hat  was suggesting," said etherwick, "was that you probably knew
by sight many of the people who live in the flats opposite your house."

"h,  know some of 'em by sight," assented the man.  "They're a mixed
lot over in those flats   few old gentlemenretiredtwo or three
old ladiesand a fair lot of actressesvery popular with the stage is
those flats.  ut, of course, it is only by sight don't know any of
'em by name.  ust see them going in and coming out, you know."

"o you happen to know by sight a tall, handsome woman who has a flat
there" asked etherwick.  " woman who's likely to be very well
dressed"

The lodginghouse keeper, who was without his coat and had the sleeves
of his shirt rolled up, scratched his elbows and looked thoughtful.

" think  do know the lady you mean," he said at last.  "oes out with
one o' those pesky little pomsa black 'unon a lead  That her"

" don't know anything about a dog," replied etherwick.  "The woman 
mean is, as  said, tall, handsome, distinguishedlooking, fair hair
and a fresh complexion, and about forty or so."

" dare say that's the one 'm thinking of," said the man.  " have
seen such a lady now and thennot of late, though."  Then he gave
etherwick a shrewd, inuiring glance.  "You and Matherfield after
her" he asked.

"ot exactly that," answered etherwick.  "hat  want to find
outnowis her name.  The name she's known by here, anyway."

" can soon settle that for you," said the lodginghouse keeper with
alacrity.  " know the caretaker of those flats well enoughoften have
a talk with him.  e'll tell me anythingbetween ourselves.  ow then,
let's get it righta tall, handsome lady, about forty, fair hair,
fresh complexion, well dressed.  That it, mister"

"You've got it," said etherwick.

"Then you wait here a bit, and 'll slip across," said the man.  "ll
on the strict between ourselves, you know.  s  said, the caretaker
and me's pals."

e left the room, and a moment later etherwick saw him cross the road
and descend into the basement of the flats.  ithin a uarter of an
hour he was back, and evidently primed with news.

"oon settled that for you, mister" he announced triumphantly.  "e
knew who you meant  The lady's name is Madame Listorelle.  ere,  got
him to write it down on a bit o' paper, not being used to foreign
names.  e thinks she's something to do with the stage.  he's the
tenant of flat twentysix.  ut he says that of late she's seldom
therecomes for a night or two, then away, maybe for months at a time.
e saw her here yesterday, though she hadn't been there, he says, for
a good bit.  ut there, it don't signify to him whether she's there or
awayalways punctual with her money, and that's the main thing, ain't
it"

etherwick added to his largess of the early morning, and went away.
e was now convinced that Lady iversreade, for some purpose of her
own, kept up a flat in addington, visited it occasionally, and was
known there as Madame Listorelle.  ow much was there in that, and what
bearing had it on the problem he was endeavouring to solve




T 

  

Late that night, when etherwick was thinking things over, a pounding
on his stairs and a knock on his outer door heralded the entrance of
Matherfield, who, with an expressive look, flung himself into the
nearest easy chair.

"or heaven's sake, Mr. etherwick, give me a drop of that whisky" he
exclaimed.  "'m dead beatand dead disappointed, too  uch a day as
've had after that woman  nd what it all means the Lord only
knows don't"

etherwick helped his evidently farspent visitor to a whisky and soda,
and waited until he had taken a hearty pull at it.  Then he resumed his
own seat and took up his pipe.

" gather that you haven't had a very successful day, Matherfield" he
suggested.  "ope it wasn't exactly a wildgoose chase"

"That's ust about what it comes to, then" exclaimed Matherfield.
"nyway, after taking no end of trouble she got clear away, practically
under my very nose  ut 'll tell you all about it that's what 
dropped in for.  hen  went out of that house in t. Mary's Terrace,
she was ust turning the corner to the right, ishop's oad way.  f
course  followed.  he went over the bridgethe big railway
bridgeand at the end turned down to addington tation.   concluded
then that she was going up by some early morning train.  he entered
the station by the firstclass booking office  was not so many yards
in her rear then.  ut instead of stopping there and taking a ticket
she went right through, crossed the station to the arrival platform and
signalled to a taxicab.  n another minute she was in it, and off.
ery luckily there was another cab close by.   hailed that and told
the driver to keep the first cab in sight and follow it to wherever it
went.  o off we went again, on another pursuit  nd it ended at
another terminusaterloo"

"oing home,  suppose," remarked etherwick, as Matherfield paused to
take up his glass.  "You can get to orking from aterloo."

"he wasn't going to any orking" answered Matherfield.  " soon found
that out.  arly as it was, there were a lot of people at aterloo, and
when she went to the ticket office  contrived to be close behind
herclose enough, at any rate, to overhear anything she said.  he
asked for a first single to outhampton."

"outhampton" exclaimed etherwick.  "m"

"outhampton" repeated Matherfield.  "irst single for outhampton.
he took the ticket and walked away, looking neither right nor left
she never glanced at me.  ell, as  said yesterday,  don't believe in
starting out on anything unless  go clean through with it.  o after a
minute's thought  booked for outhamptonthird.  Then  went out and
looked at the notice board.  outhampton, ..  t was then ..  o
 went to the telephone office, rang up our headuarters and told 'em
 was after something and they needn't expect to see me all day.  Then
 bought a timetable and a newspaper or two at the bookstall, ust
opening, and went to the train.  There were a lot of people travelling
by it.  The train hadn't come up to the platform then when it came
down a minute or two later  watched her get in she was good to spot
because of her tall figure.   got into a smoker, a bit lower down, and
in due course off we went, me wondering, to tell you the truth,
precisely why  was going  ut  was goingwherever she went."

"ven out of the country" asked etherwick, with a smile.

"ye,  thought of that" assented Matherfield.  "he might be slinging
her hook for anything  knew.  That made me turn to the steamship news
in the paper, and  saw then that the Tartaric was due to leave
outhampton for ew York about two o'clock that very afternoon.  ell,
there were more improbable things than that she meant to go by it, for
reasons of her own, especially if she really is the Mrs. hittingham of
the ellithwaite affair ten years ago.  You see,  thought it out like
thisgranting she's Mrs. hittingham, that was, she'll be astute
enough to know that there's no timelimit to a criminal prosecution in
this country, and that she's still liable to arrest, prosecution, and
conviction she'd probably know, too, that this annaford affair has
somehow drawn fresh attention to her little matter, and that she's in
danger.  gain, 'd been working out an idea about her and this man
aseverie.  ow do we know that aseverie wasn't an accomplice of hers
in that ellithwaite fraud  n most cases of that sort the woman has
an accomplice somewhere in the backgroundaseverie may have been
mixed with her then.  nd now he may have information that has led him
to warn her to make herself scarce, eh"

"There's something in that, Matherfield," admitted etherwick.
"Yesdecidedly something."

"There may be a good deal," affirmed Matherfield.  "You see, we've let
those newspaper chaps have a lot of information.  'm a believer in
making use of the ress it's a valuable aid sometimes, perhaps
generally, but there are other times when you can do too much of it
it's a sort of giving valuable aid to the enemy.   don't know whether
we haven't let those reporters know too much in this case.  e've let
'em know, for instance, about the portrait found in annaford's
pocketbook, and about the sealed packet in which, we believe, was the
secret of his patent all that's been in the papers, though, to be
sure, they didn't make much copy out of it.  till, there was enough
for anybody who followed the case closely.  ow, supposing that
aseverie was Mrs. hittingham's accomplice ten years ago, and that
he'd read all this and seen the reproduction of the portrait, wouldn't
he see that she was in some danger and warn her   think it likely,
and  wish we hadn't been uite so free with our news for those paper
chaps.  'm glad, anyhow, that there's one thing  haven't told 'em
ofthat medicine bottle found at ranett's  There's nobody but me,
you, and the medical men know of that, so far."

"You think this womanLady iversreade as she is, Mrs. hittingham as
she used to bewas making off to outhampton, and possibly farther, on
a hint from aseverie" said etherwick ruminatively.

"ut it this way," replied Matherfield.  "f course, you've got to
assume a lot, but we can't do without assuming things in this business.
Lady iversreade was formerly Mrs. hittingham.  Mrs. hittingham did a
clever bit of fraud at ellithwaite, and got away with the swag.
aseverie was her accomplice.  ow then, ten years later Mrs.
hittingham has become my Lady iversreade, a very wealthy woman.
he's suddenly visited by aseverie at iversreade ourt, and is
obviously upset by his first visit.  e comes again.  Three nights
later she's seen to come out of a club which he freuents.  he spends
most of the night in a flat in a uiet part of London, and next morning
slopes off as early as five o'clock to a portouthampton.  hat
inference is to be drawn  That her visit to outhampton has certainly
something to do with aseverie's visits to her and her visit to
ivian's"

" think there's something in that, too," said etherwick, "utwe're
on the way to outhampton.  o on"

"ery good train, that," continued Matherfield.  "e got to outhampton
ust before eighta minute or two late.   was wanting something to
eat and drink by that time, and  was glad to see my lady turn into the
refreshmentroom as soon as she left her carriage.  o did .   knew
she'd never suspect a uiet, ordinary man like me if she deigned to
give me a glanceshe's a very haughtylooking woman,  observedshe'd
only take me for a commercial traveller.  nd we were not so far off
each other in that room she sat at a little table, having some tea and
so on  was at the counter.  f course,  never showed that  was
taking any notice of herbut  got in two or three good, comprehensive
inspections.  ery goodlooking, no doubt of it, Mr. etherwicka
woman that's worn well  ut of course you've seen that for yourself."

"You must remember that 've only seen her twice," remarked etherwick,
with a laugh.  "nce at ictoria, when Miss annaford pointed her out
once night before last, when it was by a poorish gaslight.  ut 'll
take your word, Matherfield.  ell, and what happened next"

"h, she took her time over her tea and toast," continued Matherfield.
"ery leisured in all her movements,  assure you.  t last she moved
offof course  followed, casually and carelessly.  ow, as you may be
aware, outhampton est, where the train set us down, is a bit out of
the town, and  expected her to take a cab.  ut she didn't she walked
away from the station.  o did twenty or thirty yards in the rear.
he took her time it seemed to me she was purposely loitering.  t
struck me at last whyshe was waiting until the business offices were
open.   was right in that as soon as the town clocks struck nine she
uickened her pace and made a beeline for her obective.  nd what do
you think that was"

"o idea," said etherwick.

"hite tar offices" answered Matherfield.  "ent straight there, and
walked straight in  f course,  waited outside, where she wouldn't
see me when she came out again.  he was in there about twenty minutes.
hen she came out she turned to another part of the town.  nd near
that old gateway, or bar, or whatever it is that stands across the
street,  lost heraltogether"

"ome exceptional reason,  should think, Matherfield," remarked
etherwick.  "ow was it"

"My own stupid fault" growled Matherfield.  "Took my eye off her in a
particularly crowded partthe town was beginning to get very busy.  
ust happened to let my attention be divertedand she was gone  t
first  made certain she'd gone into some shop.   looked into
severalrisky as that wasbut  couldn't find her.   hung about no
good.  Then  came to the conclusion that she'd turned down one of the
side streets or alleys or passagesthere were several about thereand
got clean away.  nd after hanging around a bit, and going up one
street and down anothera poor ob in our business at the best of
times and all dependent on mere luck decided to make a bold stroke
and be sure of at any rate something."

"hat  ow" asked etherwick.

" thought 'd find out what she'd gone to the hite tar offices for,"
replied Matherfield.  "f course,  didn't want to raise any suspicion
against her under the circumstances.  ut  flatter myself 'm a bit of
a diplomatist, and  laid my plans.   went in there, got hold of a
clerk who was a likely looking chap for secret keeping, told him who 
was and showed my credentials, and asked him for the information 
wanted.   got it.  s luck would have it, my man had attended to her
himself and remembered her uite well.  f course, little more than an
hour and a half had passed since she'd been in there."

"ndwhat had she been in for" asked etherwick.  "hat did you hear"

Matherfield nodded significantly.

"ust what  expected to hear," he answered.  "he'd booked a
secondclass passage for ew York in the Tartaric, sailing that
afternoon, in the name of . unningham.  s soon as  found that out,
 knew  should come across her againthere'd be no need to go raking
the town for her.   ascertained that passengers would be allowed to go
aboard from two o'clock the boat would sail between five and six.  o,
having once more admonished the clerk to secrecy and given him
plausible excuses for my inuisitiveness,  went off to relax a bit,
and in due time sat down to an early and comfortable luncha man must
take his ease now and then, you know, Mr. etherwick."

"xactly, Matherfield uite agree," said etherwick.  "ut  dare
say your brain was at work, all the same, while you ate and drank"

"t was, sir," assented Matherfield.  "Yes made my plans.   wasn't
going to ew York, of course that was out of the uestion.  ut  was
going to have speech with her.   decided that 'd watch for her coming
aboard the Tartaricbeing alone, she'd probably come early.  
proposed to get her aside, accosting her, of course, as Lady
iversreade, tell her who  was and show my papers, and ask her if she
would give me any information about a certain r. yprian aseverie.  
thought 'd see how she took that before asking anything further if 
saw that she was taken aback, confused, and especially if she gave me
any prevaricating or elusive answer, 'd ask her straight out if before
her marriage to the late ir ohn iversreade she was the Mrs.
hittingham who, some ten years ago, stayed for a time at the hite
art otel at ellithwaite.  nd  practically made up my mind, too,
that if she admitted that and  saw good cause for it, 'd detain her."

"You meant to go as far as that" exclaimed etherwick.

" did   should have been ustified," replied Matherfield.  "owever,
that's neither here nor there, for  never saw her   was down at the
point of departure well before two, and  assured myself that nobody
had gone aboard the Tartaric up to that time.   kept as sharp a look
out as any man with only one pair of eyes could, right away from ten
minutes to two until fiveandtwenty past five, when the boat sailed,
but she never turned up.  f course you'll say that she must have
slipped on unobserved by me, but 'm positive she didn't.  o, sir
t's my opinion that she thought better of it and didn't goforfeiting
her passage money, or a part of it, would be nothing to a woman of her
meansor that she was frightened at the last minute of showing herself
on that stage"

"rightened  hy" asked etherwick.

Matherfield laughed significantly.

"There were two or three of our men from cotland Yard about," he
answered.  "'m not aware of what they were after  didn't ask 'em.
ut  did ask them to give me a hand in looking out for a lady whom 
fully describedwhich is why 'm dead certain she never went aboard.
ow, it may have been that she came down there, knewyou never
knowsome of those chaps andmade herself scarce  nyway never
set eyes on her.  ever, in fact, saw her again after  lost her in the
morning.  othat's where  am"

"You came backdefeated" remarked etherwick.

"ell, if you like to call it so," admitted Matherfield.  "Yes,  came
back by the seven thirtyeight.  og tired  ut 'm not through with
this yet, Mr. etherwick, and  want you to do something for me.  This
Miss annaford, now, is down at iversreade ourt.  They'll be on the
telephone there, of course.   want you to ring her up early tomorrow
morning, and ask her if she can meet you on important private business
in orking town at noon.  here shall we say"

"'hite orse' would do," suggested etherwick.

"ery wellhite orse otel, at noon," agreed Matherfield.  "e'll go
downfor 'll go with youby the . from ictoria.  ow please be
very careful about this, Mr. etherwick, when you telephone.  on't say
anything of any reason for going down to orking.  on't on any account
mention Lady iversreade, in any way.  Merely tell Miss annaford that
you have urgent reasons for seeing her.  ndfix it up"

"h,  can fix it up all right," answered etherwick.  "Miss annaford
can easily drive down from iversreade ourt.  ut  don't know what
you want her for."

"ait till morning," replied Matherfield, with a knowing look.  "You'll
see.  'll meet you at ictoria at ten o'clock, sharp."




T 

 T LML

etherwick was still in ignorance of the reason of Matherfield's desire
to see hona when, ust before noon next day, Matherfield and he walked
up from orking tation into the igh treet, and made for the "hite
orse."  Matherfield halted a few yards away from its door.

"Let's wait outside for her," he said.  "Till 've asked her a uestion
or two.   don't want to even run the risk of being overheard."

hona came along in a car a few minutes later, and seeing the two men
advanced to meet them.  Matherfield lost no time in getting to business.

"Miss annaford," he said, with a cautious look round, and in a low
voice, "ust tell meis Lady iversreade up there at the ourt  he
is" he continued, as hona nodded.  "hen did she come back, then"

"ery early yesterday morning," answered hona promptly.  "y the .
from ictoria.  he was up at the ourt by .."

Matherfield turned an utterly perplexed face on etherwick.  Then he
stared at hona.

"p at iversreade ourt at . yesterdayTuesdaymorning" he
exclaimed.  "mpossible   saw her at outhampton at . yesterday
morning with my own eyes."

"'m uite sure you didn't" replied hona, with a satirical laugh.
"You're under some ueer mistaken impression, Mr. Matherfield.  Lady
iversreade was in her own house, here, with me at . yesterday
morning.  That's a fact that  can vouch for"

The two men looked at each other.  ach seemed to be asking the other a
silent uestion.  ut Matherfield suddenly voiced his, in tones full of
wonder and of chagrin.

"Then who on earth is that woman that  followed to outhampton"

Matherfield's uestion went without answer.  hona, who had no idea of
what he was talking about, turned a surprised and inuiring look on
etherwick.  nd etherwick saw that the time had come for a lot of
explanation.

"Look here" he said.  "e've got to do some talking, and we can't keep
Miss annaford standing in the street.  ome into the hotelwe'll get
a private room for lunch, and then we can discuss matters all to
ourselves.  You're a bit puled by all this," he continued a few
minutes later, turning to hona when all three were safely closeted
together, and lunch had been ordered.  "nd no wonder  ut 'd better
tell you what Matherfield and  were after on Monday night, and what
Matherfield was doing all yesterday.  You see," he concluded, after
giving hona an epitomised account of the recent proceedings, " was
absolutely certain that the woman whom we saw coming out of ivian's on
Monday night was the woman you pointed out to me on unday morning at
ictoria as Lady iversreadeshe was dressed in ust the same things,
'm positivein short 'm convinced it was Lady iversreade.  Then,
Matherfield and  are both eually sure that that was the same woman we
saw coming out of t. Mary's Mansions shortly before five o'clock
yesterday morning, and whom Matherfield followed to outhampton, p to
now, we've never had a doubt that it was Lady iversreadenot a doubt"

"ell," said hona, with an incredulous laugh, " can't say, of course,
that you didn't see Lady iversreade come out of ivian's on Monday
night.  Lady iversreade was certainly in town from unday noon to
yesterday morning, and she may have gone to ivian's on Monday night
for purposes of her own.   know nothing about that.  ut  do know
that she was not in outhampton yesterday, for, as  told you, she was
back home at iversreade ourt, about halfpast nine in the morning,
and she's never left the house since.  That's plain fact"

"t's beyond me, then" exclaimed Matherfield.  "nd  say again, if
that wasn't Lady iversreade that  tracked to outhampton, who was it
'll say moreif that really was Lady iversreade that we saw coming
out of ivian's, and followed to addington, and if she wasn't the
woman who came out of those flats yesterday morning, and that  went
after, well, then, Lady iversreade has a doublewho lives in t.
Mary's Mansions  That's about it"

"s regards that," remarked etherwick.  " didn't tell you last night,
Matherfield, that  went back yesterday to that house from which we
watched, and made some cautious inuiries about the tall, handsome
woman who has a flat opposite.   got some information.  The woman whom
we followed there, and whom you were running after yesterday is known
there as a Madame Listorelle.  he's very little at her flat, though
punctual with its rent.  he's sometimes away altogether for long
periodsin fact, she's rarely seen there.  nd she's believed to be
connected with the stage.  The caretaker who supplied this information
saw her at the flat on Monday."

Matherfield smacked one hand on the open palm of the other.

"t's an alias" he exclaimed.  "et your stars she's Lady iversreade
way from her flat for long periods  f coursebecause she's down
here, at her big house.  eeps that flat up for some purpose of her
own, and calls herselfwhat is itsounds rench."

"ut supposing that's so," remarked etherwick, with a sly glance at
hona.  "t's utterly impossible that Lady iversreade could be at
iversreade ourt yesterday, and in outhampton at the same time
ome, now"

"ell,  tell you it beats me" muttered Matherfield.  " know what 
saw  f there's anything gone wrong, it's your fault, Mr. etherwick
 don't know this Lady iversreade  ll  know is that you said the
woman we saw coming out of that club was Lady iversreade.  That, sir,
is the woman  followed"

"The woman  saw coming out of ivian's was the woman pointed out to me
by Miss annaford as Lady iversreade," affirmed etherwick uietly.
"That's certain  ut"

e was interrupted at this stage by the arrival of lunch.  othing more
was said until all three were seated, and the waiter had been sent
away.  Then hona looked at her companions and smiled.

"You both seem to have arrived at a very promising stage" she said.
"t first  thought it a regular impasse, but"

"sn't it" asked etherwick.  "t present  don't see any way through
or over it."

"h,  think you're getting towards something" she retorted.  "ll
these things, puling as they are, are better than nothing.  've got
some news, tooif you're sure there are no eavesdroppers about."

"h, we're all right" said etherwick.  "ood stout old doors,
theseclosefitting.  hat next"

hona leaned across the table a little, and lowered her voice.

"There was a sort of row at the ourt at least, at the ome,
yesterday," she said.  "ith that man aseverie"

"h" exclaimed etherwick.  "That's interesting  Tell about it."

"ell,  told you that Lady iversreade arrived from London yesterday
morning about ninethirty," continued hona.  "Maor enteney arrived
with her."

"ho's Maor enteney" demanded Matherfield.

"e's a retired rmy man who's greatly interested in Lady iversreade's
ome, and looks after its affairs in London," replied etherwick.  "nd
Miss annaford thinks he's in love with the foundress.  've seen
himsaw him with Lady iversreade on unday.  Yes," he added, turning
to hona, "Maor enteney came back with her  o on."

"s soon as they arrived saw them come, from my office windowthey
came across to the ome," continued hona.  "t struck me that they
both looked unusually grave and serious.  They talked to me for a few
minutes on business matters then they went into Lady iversreade's
private office.  They were there for some little time then Lady
iversreade came out and went away  saw her cross to the ourt.
resently Maor enteney came to me, and told me that he wanted to have
a little private talk with me.  e saidas near as  can
remember'Miss eatherstone'"

Matherfield looked up uickly from his plate.

"h" he said.  "Misseatherstone"

"That's the name Miss annaford's known bythere," said etherwick.
"er mother's name.   told you before, you know."

"True, true" assented Matherfield, with a groan.  "You did remember
now.  'm muddledwith yesterday's affair."

"'Miss eatherstone,' hona went on' believe you're aware that Lady
iversreade has lately been visitedtwiceby a man who called himself
r. yprian aseverie'

"'Yes,'  answered, ' am, Maor enteney.   saw r. aseverie on both
occasions.'  'ell,' he said' don't suppose you were at all
impressed by him' 'ot at all impressed, Maor enteney,'  replied,
'except very unfavourably.'  'idn't like his looks, eh,' he asked with
a smile.  'o you'  inuired.  ''ve never seen the fellow,' he
answered.  'ut  expect tothis very morning.  That's what  want to
talk to you about.   believe he'll turn up about noonas, 
understand, he did before, wanting, of course, to see Lady iversreade.
 want you to tell the doorkeeper, Mitchell, to bring him straight in
when he comes, and Mitchell is not to say that Lady iversreade is not
inshe won't be inhe's to admit him immediately and you, if you
please, are to show him straight into the private office.  nstead of
finding Lady iversreade there, he'll findme.  s that clear'
'erfectly clear, Maor enteney,'  replied.  ''ll see to it.'
'ell, there's something else,' he said.  'fter  have had a little
plainspoken talk with this fellow,  shall ring the bell.   want you
to come in, and to bring Mitchell with you.  ndthat's all, at
present.  You understand'  ' understand, Maor enteney,'  answered.
''ll see to it.  ut as you've never seen this man there's one thing
'd like to say to youhe's the sort of man who looks as if he might
be dangerous.'  e smiled at that.  'Thank you,' he said.  ''m
prepared for that, Miss eatherstone.  You show him right in.'"

hona paused for a moment, to attend to the contents of her plate.  ut
etherwick's knife and fork had become idle so had Matherfield's each
man, it was plain, was becoming absorbed.  nd Matherfield suddenly
brightened, and gave etherwick an unmistakable wink.

"oodgoodgood" he muttered, with something like a chuckle.  "'m
beginning to see a bit of daylight  xcellentwhen you're ready,
Miss eatherstone"

"ell," continued hona, after a few minutes' pause, "about noon, r.
yprian aseverie drove up.   had already given Mitchell his
instructions, and he brought aseverie straight into my office.
aseverie was evidently in the very best of spiritshe bowed and
grimaced at sight of me as if he expected to find me dying to see him.
 made no answer to his flowery greetings  ust got up, ushered him
to the door of the private room, and closed it after him as he stepped
across the threshold.  Then  laughedhe wouldn't see who was awaiting
him until he got right into the room, and 'd already gathered from
Maor enteney that his reception couldn't be exactly pleasant or
agreeable."

Matherfield rubbed his hands together.

"oodgood" he chuckled.  "ish 'd been in that room"

"t wasn't long before  was there, Mr. Matherfield," said hona.  "
was, of course, tremendously curious to know what was going on there,
but the door fits closely, and  heard nothingno angry voices or
anything.  owever, in less than ten minutes the bell rang sharply.  
called Mitchellhe's a big, strapping, very determinedlooking
exuardsmanand in we went.   took everything in at a glance, Maor
enteney sat at Lady iversreade's desk.  n the blottingpad, his
right hand close to it, lay a revolver"

"ah" exclaimed Matherfield.  "To be sure  ust so  ine"

"pposite the desk stood aseverie, staring first at Maor enteney,
then at us.  t's difficult for me to describe how he looked.   think
the principal expression on his face was one of intense surprise."

"urprise" eaculated etherwick.

"urprise  stonishment  e looked like a man who had ust heard
something that he has believed it impossible to hear.  ut there was
also such a look of anger and ragewell, if Maor enteney hadn't had
that revolver close to his fingerends, and if Mitchell hadn't been
there,  should have screamed and run.  owever, it was not  who was
to do the running.  s soon as Mitchell and  entered, Maor enteney
spokevery uietly.  e nodded at aseverie.  'Miss eatherstone and
you, Mitchellyou see this man  f ever he comes here again, you,
Mitchell, will deny him entrance, and you, Miss eatherstone, on
hearing from Mitchell that he's here, will telephone for the police
and, if he hangs about, will give him in charge.'  Then he turned to
aseverie.  'ow, my man' he continued, pointing to the door.  'You
get outuick  o'  f course,  looked at aseverie.  e stood
staring almost incredulously at Maor enteney.  t seemed to me that
he could scarcely believe his earshe gave me the impression of being
unable to credit that he could be so treated.  ut he was also livid
with anger.  is fingers worked his eyes blaed it was dreadful to
see his lips.  e got out some words at last'"

"ive me the exact ones, if you can," interrupted Matherfield.

" can'm not likely to forget them," said hona.  "e
said'hatyou defy me, knowing what  knowknowing what  know'"

"'nowing what  know'" muttered Matherfield.  "nowing what he knew
mand then"

"Then Maor enteney ust pointed to the door.  'et out,  tell you'
he said.  'nd look in the papers tonight.  e off'"

"'Look in the papers tonight,' eh" said Matherfield.  "mum  nd
then,  suppose, he went"

"e went without another word then," assented hona.  "Mitchell
escorted him out and saw him off.  Maor enteney looked at me when
he'd gone.  'There, Miss eatherstone,' he said, 'you've seen one of
the biggest scoundrels in Londonor in urope.  Let's hope you'll
never see him again, that that's the end of him here.   think he's had
his lesson'   made no answer, but  was olly glad to see aseverie's
car scooting away down the drive"

Matherfield picked up the tankard of ale at his side and took a hearty
pull at its contents.  e set the tankard down again with an emphatic
bang.

" know what this ob is" he exclaimed triumphantly.  "lackmail"

"ust so" agreed etherwick.  "'ve been thinking that for the last
ten minutes.  aseverie has been endeavouring to blackmail Lady
iversreade.  ut that's not our affair, you know.  hat we're after is
the solving of the mystery surrounding annaford's death.  nddoes
this look likely to fit in anywhere"

" should say it decidedly does look likely" answered Matherfield.
"n my opinion it's all of a piece at least, it's a piece out of a
piece, one of many pieces, like a pule.  The thing is to put these
pieces together.  nd there are two things we can try to do at once.
irst, find out more about this man aseverie the other, get hold of
more information about the lady in t. Mary's Mansions."

"hat about approaching Lady iversreade for informationor Maor
enteney" suggested etherwick.

"Yeswhy don't you" said hona, almost eagerly.  "o  'm a bit
tired of being there as Miss eatherstone.   want to tell Lady
iversreade the truth, and all the whys and wherefores of it."

ut Matherfield shook his head.  The time for that was not yet, he
declared let them wait awhile.  nd after more conversation he and
etherwick returned to London.




T 

LT

The late afternoon edition of the evening papers were ust out when
etherwick and Matherfield reached ictoria.  Matherfield snatched one
up a moment later he thrust it before etherwick, pointing to some big
black capitals.

"ood od" he exclaimed.  "Look at that"

etherwick looked, and gasped his astonishment at what he read.

  M  T .
   T  .


etherwick turned on his companion with a look that was both
uestioning and surprised.

"This is probablyno, certainlywhat enteney referred to when he
told aseverie to look in the newspapers" he said.  "That was
yesterday it must have been in last night's papers, and this
morning's.   saw neither."

"ait" said Matherfield.  e hurried back to the bookstall and
returned with an armful of papers, turning the topmost over as he came.
"t's hereand here" he continued.  "Let's get a uiet corner
somewhere and look this thing carefully over"

"ome into a waitingroom, then," said etherwick.  "dd" he muttered,
as they turned away.  "ho should offer a rewardlike that, toowho
isn't concerned in the case"

"ow do we know who isn't concerned in the case" exclaimed
Matherfield.  "omebody evidently issomebody who can not only afford
to offer five thousand pounds, but isn't afraid to spend no end in
advertising.  Look at thatand thatand that," he went on, turning
over his purchases rapidly.  "t's in every paper in London"

"Let's read it carefully," said etherwick.  e spread out one of the
newspapers on the waitingroom table and muttered the wording of the
advertisement while Matherfield looked over his shoulder.  "Mysterious,
very" he concluded.  "hat's it mean"

ut Matherfield was rereading the advertisement.


hereas obert annaford, formerly uperintendent of olice at
ellithwaite, Yorkshire, died suddenly in an nderground ailway train,
near haring ross mbankment tation about . a.m. on March th
last, and expert medical investigation has proved that he was poisoned,
and there is evidence to warrant the belief that the poison was
administered by some person or persons with intent to cause his death,
this is to give notice that the abovementioned sum of ive Thousand
ounds will be paid to anyone first giving information which will lead
to the arrest and conviction of the person or persons concerned in
administering the said poison and that such information should be given
to the undersigned, who will pay the said reward in accordance with the
abovestated conditions.

TY, L  TY,
  olicitors.

pril nd, .
  , Lincoln's nn ields,
    London, ..


Matherfield pointed to the names of the signatories.

"enteney," he remarked.  "That's the name of the man Miss annaford
mentioned as having given aseverie his dismissal."

"f courseMaor enteney," said etherwick.  "robably a unior
partner in the firm.   know their names, but not much about them."

" thought he was a soldier," said Matherfield.  "Maor, she called
him."

"ery likely a Territorial officer," replied etherwick.  "nyway, it's
very plain what this is, Matherfield, considering all we know.  This
advertisement has been issued on behalf of Lady iversreade.  enteney,
lenkinsop  enteney are no doubt her solicitors.  utwhy"

"ye, why" exclaimed Matherfield.  "That's ust what beats me  hat
interest has she in annaford's murder  hy should she want to bring
his murderer to ustice  f his granddaughter had offered, say, a
hundred pounds for information,  could understand itshe's his flesh
and blood.  ut Lady iversreade  hy, if she's really the woman who
was once Mrs. hittingham, you'd have thought she'd have been rather
glad that annaford was out of the way  nd, after all, this mayn't
come from her."

"'m absolutely certain it does," asserted etherwick.  "utting
everything together, what other conclusion can we come to  t comes
from Lady iversreadeand her adviserMaor enteney, and it's
something to do with that man aseverie.  utwhat"

"t ought to be looked into," muttered Matherfield.  "They've never
approached us on the matter.  t's a purely voluntary offer on their
part.  They've left the police clean out."

"ell,  make a suggestion," said etherwick.  " think you and  had
better call at enteney's tomorrow morning.  e can tell them
somethingperhaps they'll tell us something.  nyway, it's a foolish
thing to divide forces we'd far better unite in a common effort."

"m" replied Matherfield doubtfully.  "ut these lawyer chapsthey've
generally got something up their sleevessome card that they want to
play at their own moment.  owever, we can try 'em."

"Meet me at the southeast corner of Lincoln's nn ields at halfpast
ten tomorrow morning," said etherwick.  "enteney's offices are close
by.  e'll go togetherand ask them straight out what this
advertisement means."

"ll rightbut if they won't tell" suggested Matherfield.

"Then, in that case, we'll introduce Lady iversreade's name, and ask
them if Lady iversreade of iversreade ourt and Mrs. hittingham,
formerly of ellithwaite, are one and the same person," replied
etherwick.  "ome   think we can show them that we already know a
good deal."

"e have certainly a card or two to play," admitted Matherfield.  "ll
right, Mr. etherwick  Tomorrow morning, then, as you suggest."

e was waiting at the appointed place when etherwick hurried up next
morning.  etherwick immediately turned him down the lower side of the
ields.

"'ve found out something about these people we're going to see," he
said.  "My clerk, Mapperley, told me a bit he's a sort of walking
encyclopdia.  ld, highly respectable firm this.  enteney, senior, is
retired the firm is now really lenkinsop  enteney, unior.  nd
enteney, unior, is the Maor enteney who takes such an interest in
Lady iversreade's omeand in Lady iversreade.  s  suggested last
night, he was a Territorial officerso now he's back at his own ob.
ow then, Matherfield, let's arrange our plan of campaign.  You, of
course, have your official credentials'm a deeply interested person,
the man who chanced to witness annaford's death.   think you'd better
be spokesman."

"ell, you'll come in when wanted" suggested Matherfield.  "You're
better used to lawyers than  am, being one yourself."

" fear my acuaintance with solicitors is, so far, extremely limited,
Matherfield," replied etherwick with a laugh.  " have seen a
briefbut only occasionally.  owever, here we are at , and a
solid and sombre old house it is."

The two callers had to wait for some time before any apparent notice
was taken of their cards by the persons to whom they had been sent in.
Matherfield was beginning to chafe when, at last, an elderly clerk
conducted them up to an inner room wherein one coldeyed,
immobilefaced man sat at a desk, while another,, scarcely less stern
in appearance, in whom etherwick immediately recognised the Maor
enteney pointed out by hona, stood, hands in pockets, on the
hearthrug.  ach stared silently at the two callers the man at the
desk pointed to chairs on either side of his fortress.  e looked at
Matherfield.

"Yes" he asked.

"Mr. lenkinsop,  presume" began Matherfield, with a polite bow to
the desk.  "nd Mr. enteney" with another to the hearthrug.

"ust so," agreed lenkinsop.  "recisely  Yes"

"You have my card, gentlemen, and so you know who  am," continued
Matherfield.  "The police"

" moment," interrupted lenkinsop.  e picked up etherwick's card and
glanced from it to its presenter.  "Mr. uy etherwick," he remarked.
"oes Mr. etherwick also call on behalf of the police  ecause," he
added, with a dry smile, " think 've seen Mr. etherwick in wig and
gown."

" am the man who was present at obert annaford's death," said
etherwick.  "f you are conversant with the case"

"uiteevery detail" said lenkinsop.

"Then you know what  saw, and what evidence  gave at the inuest,"
continued etherwick.  " have followed up the case ever sinceand
that's why  am here."

"ot as amicus curi, then" remarked lenkinsop with a still dryer
smile.  "You're not a disinterested adviser.   see  nd Mr.
Matherfieldwhy is he here"

" was saying, Mr. lenkinsop, that the police have seen the
advertisement signed by your firm, offering five thousand pounds
rewardetcetera," answered Matherfield.  "ow,  have this annaford
case in hand, and  can assure you 've done a lot of work at it.  o,
in his way, has Mr. etherwick.  e're convinced that annaford was
murdered by poison, and that whoever poisoned him also poisoned the man
ranett at the same time.  ow, as either you or some persona client,
 supposebehind you is so much concerned in bringing annaford's
murderer to ustice as to offer a big sum for necessary information, we
think you must know a great deal, and  suggest to you, gentlemen, that
you ought to place your knowledge at our disposal.   hope my
suggestion is welcome, gentlemen."

lenkinsop drummed the blottingpad before him with the tips of his
fingers, and his face became more inscrutable than ever.  s for
enteney, he maintained the same attitude which he had preserved ever
since the visitors entered the room, lounging against the mantelpiece,
hands in pockets, and his eyes alternately fixed on either etherwick
or Matherfield.  There was a brief silence at last lenkinsop spoke
abruptly.

" don't think we have anything to say," he said.  "hat we have to say
has been said already in the advertisement.  e shall pay the offered
reward to the person who gives satisfactory information.   don't think
that interferes with the police work."

"That doesn't help me much, Mr. lenkinsop," protested Matherfield.
"You, or your client, must know more than that  There must be good
reasons why your client should offer such a big sum as reward.   think
we ought to knowmore."

" am not prepared to tell you more," answered lenkinsop.  "xcept
that if we get the information which we think we shall get, we shall
not be slow to hand it over to the police authorities."

"That might be too late," urged Matherfield.  "This is an intricate
casethere are a good many wheels within wheels."  Then, interpreting
a glance which he had ust received from etherwick as a signal to go
further, he added "e know what a lot of wheels there areno one
better  or example, gentlemen, there is the curious fashion in which
this affair is mixed up with Lady iversreade"

n spite of their evidently habitual practice of selfcontrol, the two
solicitors could not repress signs of astonishment.  lenkinsop's face
fell enteney started out of his lounging attitude and stood upright.
nd for the first time he spoke.

"hat do you know about Lady iversreade" he demanded.

" good deal, sir, but not so much as  intend to know," answered
Matherfield firmly.  "ut  do know thisthat annaford, ust previous
to his sudden death, was in possession of a portrait of Lady
iversreade, and believed her to be identical with a certain Mrs.
hittingham who was through his hands on a charge of fraud, ten years
ago, at ellithwaite, in Yorkshire.  , too, believe that this Mrs.
hittingham is now Lady iversreade, and  may tell you that 'm in
full possession of all the facts relating to the ellithwaite
affairan affair of obtaining a diamond necklace, worth about four
thousand pounds, by means of a worthless cheue, and"

lenkinsop suddenly rose from his chair, holding up a hand.

" moment, if you please" he said.  "enteney," he continued, turning
to his partner, "a word with you in your room."

Matherfield glanced triumphantly after the retreating pair, and laughed
when a door had closed on them.

"That's got 'em, Mr. etherwick" he exclaimed.  "They see that we know
more than they reckoned for.  n some way or other, it strikes me, this
advertisement is a piece of bluff"

"luff" said etherwick.  "hat do you mean"

"hat  say," answered Matherfield.  "luff  one to prevent somebody
from bringing up that old ellithwaite affair.  Lay you a thousand to
one it is.  You'll see these two lawyers will be more communicative
when they come back.  ow they shall talkand we'll listen"

"f you have to do any more talking, Matherfield," said etherwick,
"keep Miss annaford's name out of it.  he's in a rather awkward
position.  he went there, of course, to find out what she could, and
the result's been that she's taken a fancy to Lady iversreade, got a
genuine interest in the work there, and wants to stop.  it of a
bother, all that, and it'll need some straightening out.  nyway, keep
her name out of it here."

"s  say, sir, when these chaps come back to us, they'll do the
talking" answered Matherfield, with a chuckle.  "You'll see  f you
want to keep Miss annaford's name out, so do they want to keep Lady
iversreade's name out know the signs"

lenkinsop and enteney suddenly came back and seated themselves,
lenkinsop at his desk and enteney close by.  nd lenkinsop
immediately turned to his callers.  is manner had changed he looked
now like a man who is anxious to get a settlement of a difficult
uestion.

"e have decided to talk freely to you," he said at once.  "That means,
to tell you everything we know about this matter.  You, Mr.
Matherfield, as representing the police, will, of course, treat our
communication confidentially.   needn't ask you, Mr. etherwick, to
regard all that's said here, asyou know  ow, to begin withust
get one fact, an absolutely irrefutable fact, into your minds at once.
Lady iversreade is not the woman who was known as Mrs. hittingham at
ellithwaite ten years ago, nor did annaford believe that she was
either"

"hat" exclaimed Matherfield.  "ut" he turned to etherwick.
"You hear that" he went on.  "hy, we know"

"Let Mr. lenkinsop go on," said etherwick uietly.  "e's explaining,
 think."

"ust so," agreed lenkinsop.  "nd 'm beginning by endeavouring to
clear away a few mistaken ideas from your minds.  Lady iversreade is
not Mrs. hittingham.  annaford did not think she was Mrs.
hittingham.  t was not Lady iversreade's portrait that annaford cut
out of the paper."

etherwick could not repress a start at that.

"hose was it, then" he demanded.  "or  certainly believed it was"

lenkinsop stooped and drew out a drawer from his desk.  rom a bundle
of documents he produced a newspaper, carefully folded and labelled.
pening this, he laid it before the two visitors, pointing to a picture
marked with blue pencil.  nd etherwick at once saw that here was a
duplicate of the portrait in his own pocketbook.  ut there was this
important differencewhile annaford had cut away the lettering under
his picture, it was there in the one which lenkinsop exhibited.  e
started again as he read itMadame nita Listorelle.

"That's the picture which annaford cut out of the paper," said
lenkinsop.  "t is not that of Lady iversreade."

"Then it's that of a woman who's her double" exclaimed Matherfield.
"'ll lay anything that if you asked a hundred men who've seen Lady
iversreade if that's her picture, they'd swear it is"

" see," said etherwick, disregarding his companion's outburst, "that
this purports to be a portrait of a Madame Listorelle, who is described
in the accompanying letterpress as a famous connoisseur of precious
stones.  ow, in relation to what we're discussing, may  ask a plain
uestion  ho is Madame Listorelle"

lenkinsop smiledoracularly.

"Madame Listorelle," he replied, "is the twin sister of Lady
iversreade"




T 

TLL M

lenkinsop's sudden announcement, not altogether unexpected by
etherwick as a result of the last few minutes' proceedings, seemed to
strike Matherfield with all the force of a lightninglike illumination.
is mouth opened his eyes widened he turned on etherwick as if,
having been lost for a while in a baffling mae, he had suddenly seen a
way pointed out to him.

"h, that's it, is it" he exclaimed.  " twin sister, eh  Thenbut
go on, Mr. lenkinsop 'm beginning to see things."

"The matter is doubtless pulingto outsiders," responded lenkinsop.
"To clear it up,  shall have to go into some family history.  Lady
iversreade and Madame Listorelle are,  repeat, twin sisters.  They
are the daughters of a man who in his time was captain of various
merchant shipsthe old sailing shipsand who knocked about the world
a good deal.  e married an merican woman, and his two daughters were
born in alveston, Texas.  They were educated in mericabut there's
no need to go into the particulars of their early lives"

"There's a certain particular that  should like to have some
information about, if you please," interrupted etherwick.  "The Mrs.
hittingham who was at ellithwaite ten years ago had the figure of a
snake tattooed round a wrist, in various colours.  he wore a black
velvet band to cover it.  ow"

lenkinsop turned to his partner with a smile.

" thought that would come up," he said.  "ell Mr. etherwick, if you
want to know about that matter, both sisters are tattooed in the same
fashion.  That was a bit of work of the old seadog, their fathera
fancy, and a very foolish one, of his.  e had the children tattooed in
that way when they were uite young, much to their disgust when they
grew older.  ach lady wears a covering velvet armletas  know."

"roceed, if you please," said etherwick.  "That's cleared up"

" gather that you've been making inuiries on your own account,"
observed lenkinsop.  "ell, since we're determined to tell you
everything, we'll be as good as our word.  o let's come to the
ellithwaite affair.  You've probably heard only one versionyou may
have got it from annaford you may have got it from old newspapers
you may have got it on the spotit's immaterial to us.  ut you
haven't heard the version of the lady who was then Mrs. hittingham.
That puts a rather different complexion on things.  or reasons of her
own, with which we've nothing to do, Mrs. hittinghamher proper and
legal name at that timestayed at ellithwaite for a while.  he had
various transactions with a eweller there eventually she bought from
him a diamond necklace at a pricethree thousand nine hundred pounds.
he gave him a cheue for the amount, fully expecting that by the time
it reached her bankers in Manchester certain funds for her credit would
have reached them from merica.  There was a hitchthe funds didn't
arrivethe cheue was returned.  The eweller approached the
policeannaford, their superintendent there, got out a warrant and
tracked down Mrs. hittingham.  e arrested her, and she got away from
him, left ngland, and returned to merica.  or some time she was in
financial straits.  ut she did not forget her liabilities, and
eventually she sent the ellithwaite eweller the agreed price of the
diamond necklace, and eight years' interest at five per cent. on the
amount.  he holds his formal receipt for the money she sent him.  o
much for that episodewhether annaford ever knew of the payment or
not,  don't know.  e are rather inclined to believe that he didn't.
utthe necklace was paid for, and paid for handsomely."

" may as well say that 'm aware of that," remarked etherwick.  "
have been informed of the fact at first hand."

"ery good.   see you have been at ellithwaite," said lenkinsop with
another of his shrewd smiles.  "ow then, we come to what is far more
pertinentrecent events.  The situation as regards Lady iversreade
and Madame Listorelle some little time agosay, when annaford came to
townwas this Lady iversreade, widow of ir ohn iversreade, had
inherited his considerable fortune, was settled at iversreade ourt in
urrey, and had founded a ome for wounded officers close by, of which
my friend and partner, Maor enteney there, is London representative.
er sister, Madame Listorelle, had a flat at addington and another in
ew York.  he was chiefly in ew York, but she was sometimes in London
and sometimes in aris.  s a matter of fact, Madame Listorelle is an
expert in precious stones, and a dealer in them.  ut she has recently
become engaged to be married to a wellknown peer, an elderly, very
wealthy manwhich possibly has a good deal to do with what  am going
to tell you."

"robably,  think, lenkinsopnot possibly," suggested enteney.
"robablydecidedly."

"robably, thenprobably" assented lenkinsop.  e leaned forward
across his desk towards the two listeners.  "ow, gentlemen, your
closest attention, for 'm coming to the really important points of
this matterthose that affect the police particularly.  bout a
fortnight ago Lady iversreade, being in her private office at her
home, close by iversreade ourt, was waited upon by a man who sent in
a card bearing the name of r. yprian aseverie.  Lady iversreade
thought that the presenter of this card was some medical man who wished
to inspect the ome, and he was admitted to see her.  he soon found
out that he had come on no such errand as she had imagined.  e told
her a strange tale.  e let her know, to begin with, that he was fully
conversant with that episode in her sister's life which related to
ellithwaite and the diamond necklace.  Lady iversreade, who knew all
about it, felt that the man's information had been gained at first
hand.  e also let her know that Madame Listorelle's whereabouts and
engagement were familiar to him in short, he showed that he was well
up in the present family history, both as regards Lady iversreade and
her sister.  Then he let his hand be seen more plainly.  e told Lady
iversreade that a certain gang of men in London had become acuainted
with the facts of the ellithwaite matter, the warrant, the arrest, the
escape, and that they were also aware of Madame Listorelle's engagement
to Lordwe will leave his name out at present, or refer to him as Lord
and that they wanted a price for their silence.  n other words,
they were determined on blackmail.  f they were not paid their price,
they were going to Lord , with all the facts, to tell him that he was
engaged to a woman who, as they would put it, was still liable by the
law of the land to arrest and prosecution for fraud."

"sn't she" asked Matherfield suddenly.  "o timelimit in these sort
of cases,  think, Mr. lenkinsop.  Liable ten or twenty or thirty
years after think"

"'ve already said that the ellithwaite affair was one of account,"
replied lenkinsop.  "There was no intent to defraud, and the full
amount and interest on it was duly paid.  ut that's not the
pointwe're dealing with the presentment of this to Lady iversreade
by the man aseverie.  f course, Lady iversreade didn't know how the
law might be, and she was alarmed on her sister's account.  he asked
aseverie what he wanted.  e told her plainly then that he could
settle these menif she would find the money.  e had, he said, a
certain hold over them which he could use to advantage.  Lady
iversreade wanted to know what that hold was he wouldn't tell her.
he then wanted to know how much the men wanted he wouldn't say.  hat
he did say was that if she would be prepared to find the money to
silence them, he, during the next week, would exert pressure on them to
accept a reasonable amount, and would call on her on the following
riday and tell her what they would take.  he made that appointment
with him."

"nd,  hope, took advice in the meantime," muttered Matherfield.
"ught to have handed him over there and then"

"oshe took no advice in the meantime," continued lenkinsop.
"Madame Listorelle was in arisMaor enteney was away on business in
the country.  Lady iversreade awaited aseverie's next coming.  hen
he came he told her what his gang wantedthirty thousand pounds.  e
specified, too, the way in which it was to be paidin a fashion which
would have prevented the payment being traced to the people who
received it.  ut now Lady iversreade was more preparedshe had had
time to think.  he expected Maor enteney next day she also knew
that her sister would return from aris on the following Monday.  o
she told aseverie that she would give him an answer on Monday evening
if he would make an appointment to meet her at some place in London.
ventually they made an appointment at ivian's, in andlestick
assage.  aseverie went away next day Lady iversreade told Maor
enteney all that had happened.  s a result, he went with her to
ivian's on Monday evening.  They waited an hour beyond the fixed time.
aseverie made no appearance"

"ust so" muttered Matherfield.  "e wouldn'tthe Maor being there"

"erhaps," assented lenkinsop.  "nyway, he didn't materialise.  o
Lady iversreade went away, leaving Maor enteney behind her.   may
say that he stopped there for some further time, keeping a sharp
lookout for the man whom Lady iversreade had described in detaila
remarkable man in appearance,  understand.  ut he never saw him."

"o" exclaimed Matherfield cynically.  "f course he didn't  ut she
would ha' doneif she'd gone alone"

"ell, there it was," continued lenkinsop.  "ow for Lady iversreade.
he drove to her sister's flat in addington, and found Madame
Listorelle ust returned from aris.  he told her all that had
happened.  Madame Listorelle determined to go to ew York at once and
get certain papers from her flat there which would definitely establish
her absolute innocence in the ellithwaite affair.  Leaving Lady
iversreade in the flat, Madame Listorelle set off for outhampton
before five o'clock next morningyes"

Matherfield, uttering a deep groan, smote his forehead.

"ye" he muttered.  "ust so  To be sure  ut go ongo on, sir."

"You seem to be highly surprised," said lenkinsop.  "oweverat
outhampton she booked a passage in a name she always used when
travellingher maiden nameby the Tartaric, sailing that afternoon.
That done, she went to a hotel for lunch.  Then she began to think
things over more calmly.  nd in the end, instead of sailing for ew
York, she went back, cancelled her booking, and set off by train to
Lord 's country seat in iltshire, and told him the whole story.  he
wired to her sister as to what she had done, and in the evening wrote
to her.  Meanwhile, Lady iversreade had returned, early in the
morning, to iversreade ourt.  Maor enteney went with her.  e was
confident that aseverie would turn up.  e did turn up  ut he did
not see Lady iversreade.  e saw Maor enteneyalone.  nd Maor
enteney, after a little plain talk to him, metaphorically kicked him
out, and told him to do his worst.  e wentwarned that if ever he
showed himself there again he would be handed over to the police."

Matherfield groaned again, but the reason of his distress was obviously
of a different nature.

" mistake, sira great mistake" he exclaimed, shaking his head at
enteney.  "You shouldn't have let that fellow go like that  You
should have handed him over there and then.  o  You don't know where
he may be"

"h, well, we're not uite such fools as we seem, Matherfield," he
replied.  "hen  went down to orking with Lady iversreade on Tuesday
morning  had with me a smart man whom  can trust.  e saw aseverie
arrive he saw aseverie leave.   think we shall be able to put our
fingers on aseverie at any moment.  ur man won't lose sight of him"

"h, well, that's better, sir, that's much better" said Matherfield.
"That's all right   chap like that should be watched night and day.
ut now, gentlemen, about this reward  Your notion of offering it
sprang, of course, from this aseverie business.  uthow, exactly
id he mention annaford to Lady iversreade"

"o" replied lenkinsop.  "'ll tell you how we came to issue the
advertisement.  ll unday afternoon and evening, and for some time on
Monday morning, Lady iversreade, Maor enteney, and myself were in
close consultation about this affair.  'll tell you at once how and
why we connected it with the poisoning of annaford, of which, of
course, all of us had read in the newspapers."

"yehow, now" asked Matherfield.

"ecause of this," answered lenkinsop.  e tapped his desk to
emphasise his words, watching Matherfield keenly as he spoke.  "ecause
of this aseverie told Lady iversreade that the gang of blackmailers
had in their possession the original warrant for Mrs. hittingham's
arrest"

etherwick felt himself impelled to ump in his chair, to exclaim
loudly.  e repressed the inclination, but Matherfield was less
reserved.

"h" he exclaimed sharply.  "h"

"aseverie made a false step there," continued lenkinsop.  "e should
never have told that.  ut he didno doubt he thought a rich woman
easy prey.  ow, of course, when we came to consult, we knew all about
the ellithwaite affair we knew, too, that annaford was
superintendent at the time and that he had the warrant it was not at
all improbable that he had preserved it in his pocketbook, and had it
on him when he came to London.  hat, then, was the obvious
conclusionthat the men who now held that warrant had got it, probably
by foul means, from annaford, and were concerned in his murder
ndmore than thatdid the gang of which aseverie spoke really
exist  asn't it likely that the gang wasaseverie"

"ye" muttered Matherfield.  "'ve been thinking of that"

"Yet," said lenkinsop, "it was on the cards that there might be a
gang.  e searched all the newspapers' accounts thoroughly.  e found
that next to no information could be got as to annaford's movements
between the time of his arrival in London and the night of his death.
The one man who might have given more information about annaford's
doings on the evening preceding his deathranettwas dead, evidently
poisoned, as annaford was poisoned.  These were circumstancesthey've
probably occurred to both of youwhich led us to believe that
annaford had formed the acuaintance of folk here in town who were of
a shady sort.  nd one thing was absolutely certainif the gang, or if
aseverie, had really got that warrant, they had got it from annaford
h"

"That may be taken as certain," assented etherwick.  "ither directly
or indirectly, it must have been from him."

"e think they, or he, got it directly from him," said lenkinsop.
"ur theory is that if there is a gang aseverie is an active, perhaps
the leading, member that annaford was previously acuainted with him
or some other member that annaford was with him or them on the
evening preceding his death that he okingly told them that he had
discovered the identity of Madame Listorelle with Mrs. hittingham and
that they poisoned himand ranett, as being presentin order to keep
the secret to themselves and to blackmail Madame Listorelle and her
sister, Lady iversreade.  That's our general ideaand that's why, on
Monday noon, we issued the advertisement.  e meant to keep things to
ourselves at first, and if substantial evidence came, to pass it over
to the police.  ow you know everything.  t may be, if there is a
gang, that one member will turn traitor for the sake of five thousand
pounds and if he can exculpate himself satisfactorily it may be, too,
that matters will develop until we're in a position to fasten things on
aseverie"

" still wish that either Lady iversreade or Maor enteney had handed
him over to custody" said Matherfield.  "You see"

"You've got to remember that aseverie never demanded anything for
himself," interrupted enteney.  "e represented himself as a
gobetween.  ut our man's safe enougha retired detective, and"

ust then a clerk opened the door and entered with a telegram.
lenkinsop tore open the envelope, glanced hurriedly at the message and
flung the form on his desk with an exclamation of annoyance.

"This is from our man" he said.  "ent from over.  ollowed aseverie
down thereand aseverie's slipped him"




T 

T T LL

enteney strode forward and picked up the telegram a moment later he
passed it over to etherwick.

"That's most unfortunate" he exclaimed.  "nd unexpected, too  f
course, the fellow's slipped off to the ontinent."

Matherfield looked over etherwick's shoulder and read the message.


"ollowed him down here last night.  ut up at same hotel, but he
slipped me and got clear away early this morning.  eturning now."


"You should have employed two men, gentlemen," said Matherfield.
"ne's not enoughin a case of that sort.  ut it's as  said
beforethis man should have been given into custody at once.
owever"

e got up from his chair, as if there was no more to be said, and moved
towards the door.  ut halfway across the room he paused.

"You'll let me know if anybody comes forward about that reward" he
suggested.  "t's more of a police matter, you know."

The two partners, who were obviously much annoyed by the telegram,
nodded.

"e shall let you knowat once," answered lenkinsop.  "f course,
you'll regard all we've told you as strictly confidential"

"h, to be sure, sir," replied Matherfield.  "t's not the only private
and confidential feature of this affair,  assure you."

utside he turned to etherwick.

"ell" he said.  "e've cleared up a few things, Mr. etherwickor,
rather, those two have cleared them up for us.  ut are we any nearer
answering the uestion that we want answeringwho poisoned obert
annaford"

" think we are" replied etherwick.  " am, anyhow  ither aseverie
poisoned himor he knows who did"

"nows who did" repeated Matherfield.  "hthat's more like it.  
don't think he did ithe wouldn't be so ready about showing himself
forward."

"'m not so sure of that," remarked etherwick.  "rom what we've heard
of him, he seems to be a bold and daring sort of scamp.  robably he
thought he'd have a very easy prey in Lady iversreade probably, too,
he believed that a woman who's got all that money would make little to
do about parting with thirty thousand pounds.  ne thing's sure,
howeveraseverie knows what we want to know.  ndhe's gone"

"erhapsperhaps" said Matherfield.  "nd perhaps not.  This man of
enteney's no doubt tracked him to over, and there he lost him, but
that isn't saying that aseverie's gone on the ontinent.  f
aseverie's the cute customer that he seems to be, he'd put two and two
together when Maor enteney warned him off iversreade ourt.  e'd
probably suspect enteney of setting a watch on him he may have
spotted the very man who was watching.  Then, if he'd any sense, he'd
lead that man a bit of a dance, and eventually double on him.  o
should say aseverie's back here in town  That's about it, Mr.
etherwick.  ut what's this  ere's one of my men coming to meet us.
 left word where  should be found."

etherwick looked up and saw a man, who was obviously a policeman in
plain clothes, coming towards them.  e was a uietlooking,
stodgyfaced man, but he had news written all over his plain face.

"ell, Marler" inuired Matherfield as they met.  "ot something"

There was nobody about in that uiet corner of Lincoln's nn ields,
yet the man looked round as if anxious to escape observation, and he
spoke in a whisper.

" believe 've got that chemist" he answered.  "Leastways, it's like
this.  There's a chemist  tried this morningname of Macpherson, in
Maiden Lane.   showed him the facsimiles of the lost labels on the
medicine bottles, and asked him if he could give me any information.
e's a very cautious sort of man,  think he examined the facsimiles a
long time, saying nothing.  Then he said he supposed  was a policeman,
and so on, and of course  had to tell him a bitonly a bit.  Then he
said, all of a sudden, 'Look here, my friend,' he said, 'you'd better
tell me, straight outhas this to do with that annaford poisoning
case'  o, of course,  said that, between ourselves, it had.  'sn't
Matherfield in charge of that' he said.  f course,  said you were.
'ery well' he said.  'You send Matherfield to me.  'm not going to
say anything to you,' he said.  'hat 've got to say 'll say to
Matherfield.'  o  went back to headuarters, and they told me you'd
gone to Lincoln's nn ields."

"ll right, my lad" said Matherfield.  "f you've found the right man,
'll remember you.  hat's his nameMacpherson, Maiden Lane  ery
goodthen 'll ust step along and see him.  ot a word to anybody,
Marler" he added, as the man turned away.  "eep close.  ow, this is
a bit of all right, Mr. etherwick" he continued, chuckling and
rubbing his hands.  "This beats all we heard at enteney's  nly let
me get the name and address of the man for whom that bottle of medicine
was made up, and  think  shall have taken a long stride  ut come
alongwe'll see the chemist together."

The shop in Maiden Lane before which they presently paused was a small,
narrowfronted, oldfashioned establishment, with little in its windows
beyond the usual coloured bottles and over the front no more than the
name "Macpherson" in faded gilt letters on a timestained signboard.
t was dark and stuffy within the shop, and etherwick had to strain
his eyes to see a tall, thin, elderly, spectacled man, very precise and
trim in appearance, who stood behind the single counter, silently
regarding him and Matherfield.

"Mr. Macpherson" inuired Matherfield.  "ust so  ood morning, sir.
My name is Matherfieldnspector Matherfield.  ne of my men tells
me"

"ne moment" interrupted the chemist.  e stepped behind a screen at
the rear of his shop and presently returned with a young man, to whom
he whispered a word or two.  Then he beckoned to his two visitors, and
opening a door at the further corner, ushered them into a private
parlour.  "e shall be to ourselves here, Mr. Matherfield," he said.
"nd 've no doubt your business is of a highly confidential nature."

"omething of that sort, Mr. Macpherson," assented Matherfield, as he
and etherwick took chairs at a centre table.  "ut my man'll have
prepared you a bit, no doubt.  e tells me he showed you the
photographed facsimiles of certain torn labels that are on a medicine
bottle which figures in the annaford case, and that in conseuence of
your seeing them you asked to see me.  ell, sir, here  am"

"ye, ust so, Mr. Matherfield, ust so, precisely," replied the
chemist, turning up the gaset which hung above the table.  "ye, to
be sure"  e, too, sat down at the table, and folded his thin long
fingers together.  "ye, and you'll be thinking, Mr. Matherfield, that
yon bottle has something to do with the poisoning of annaford"

"'ll be candid with you, Mr. Macpherson," answered Matherfield.  "ut
first let me ask you something.  ave you read the newspaper accounts
of this affair"

"'ve done that, Mr. Matherfieldyes, all  could lay hands on."

"Then you'll be aware that there was another man poisoned as well as
annaforda man named ranett, who was in annaford's company on the
night when it all happened  This gentleman here is the one that was in
the nderground train and saw annaford die, and ranett make off, as
he said, to fetch a doctor."

"That'll be Mr. etherwick, 'm thinking," said the chemist, with a
polite bow.  "ye, ust so"

" see you've read the reports of the inuest," remarked Matherfield,
with a smile.  "ery well, as  say, ranett was found dead later.  
discovered a medicine bottle and a glass at his bedside.  There'd been
whisky in both, but according to the medical experts there had also
been poisonthe traces, they say, were indisputable.  ow, on that
medicine bottle were two torn labelson the upper one, as you see from
the facsimile photograph, there's been a name writtenall that's left
is the initial . and the first letter of a surname, .  ll the rest's
gone.  nd what  want to know isare you the chemist that made up the
medicine or the tonic, or whatever it was, that was in that bottle,
and, if so, who is the customer for whom you made it, and whose
hristian name begins with . and surname with .  o you comprehend
me"

"ye, aye, Mr. Matherfield" answered the chemist eagerly.  "'m
appreciating every word you're saying, and very lucid it all is.  nd
'm willing to give you all the information in my power, but first 'd
ust like to have a bit myself on a highly pertinent matter.  ow,
you'll be aware, Mr. Matherfield, if you've seen the newspapers of this
last day or two, that there's a firm of solicitors in Lincoln's nn
ields that's offering a reward of five thousand pounds"

"'m well enough aware of it, Mr. Macpherson," interrupted Matherfield
with a laugh and a sly glance at etherwick.  "Mr. etherwick and
myself have ust come straight from their office, and what you want to
know isif you give me information will it be the same thing as giving
it to them  You want to make sure about the reward"

"recisely, Mr. Matherfield, precisely" assented the chemist eagerly.
"You've hit my meaning exactly.  or, of course, when there's a reward
like yon"

"f you give us information, Mr. Macpherson, that'll lead to the arrest
and conviction of the guilty party, you can rest assured you'll get
that reward," said Matherfield.  "nd Mr. etherwick'll support me in
that, 'm sure."

"'m satisfied'm satisfied, gentlemen" exclaimed Macpherson, as
etherwick murmured his confirmation.  "ell, it's a strange, black
business, and 'd no idea that  would come to be associated with it
until that man of yours called in this morning, Mr. Matherfield.  ut
then  knew  nd 'll shorten matters by telling you, at once made
up the tonic that was in that bottle"

Matherfield rubbed his hands.

"ood" he said uietly.  "ood  nd now, thenthe critical uestion
or whom"

"or a r. harles mbrose, from a prescription of his own," replied
Macpherson.  "t's a sort of pickmeup tonic.   first made it up for
him two years ago 've made it up for him several times since.  The
last occasion was about six weeks ago.   have all the dates, though,
in my books  can show you them."

"ait a bit," said Matherfield.  "That's of no great importanceyet.
r. harles mbrose, eh  ave you his address"

"ye, to be sure" answered the chemist.  "is address is , umber
, ohn treet."

"delphi" suggested Matherfield.

"delphi, precisely, umber , ohn treet, delphi," repeated
Macpherson.  "That's in the books, too."

Matherfield suddenly became silent, staring at the floor.  hen he
looked up again it was at etherwick.

"idn't ranett exclaim that he knew of a doctor, close by, when he
rushed out of that train at haring ross nderground" he asked.
"ave the impression that he knew of one close by, anyway"

"e said distinctly close by," answered etherwick.  "hy, are you
thinking"

Matherfield interrupted him with a wave of the hand, and turned again
to the chemist.  "You've seen this r. harles mbrose" he asked
abruptly.

"h,  have, Mr. Matherfield, many a time and often," replied
Macpherson.  "ut now  come to think of it, not lately."

"henlast" demanded Matherfield.

" should think last when he called in and told me to make him another
bottle of his tonic," answered Macpherson, after some thought.  "s 
said ust now, perhaps about six weeks ago.  ut the books"

"ever mind the books yet.  hat's this r. harles mbrose like"

" tall, handsome man, distinguishedlooking should say about forty
years of age.   dark manhair, eyes, beard.  e wears his moustache
and beard inwell, a sort of foreign fashion in fact, he's more like
a paniard than an nglishman."

"utis he an nglishman"

"e was always taken by me for an nglishman he speaks like onethat
is, like an nglishman of the upper classes.  e once told me he was an
xford manwe'd been talking about universities."

"elldressed man"

"ye, he was that   smart, fine man."

"id you ever see him in a big, dark overcoat, with a large white silk
muffler about his neck and the lower part of his face"

"ye, 've seen him like that  n chilly evenings.  ndeed, that's
another thing he told mehe was subect to bronchial attacks."

"Muffled himself well up, eh" suggested Matherfield.

"ye, ust so  e's been in here like that."

Matherfield turned to etherwick with a significant glance.

"That's the man who met annaford at ictoria tation that nightthe
man that Ledbitter saw, and that nobody's seen since" he exclaimed.
" million to one on it  ow then, who is he"

"You know his name and his address," remarked etherwick.

"Yesand  know, too, that Mr. Macpherson here hasn't seen him
lately" retorted Matherfield dryly.  "ow often, now, Mr. Macpherson,
did you use to see him   mean, did you use to see him at other times
than when he came into your shop"

"h, yes  've seen him in the street, outside," replied the chemist.
"'ve seen him, too, going in and out of ule's, and in and out of
omano's."

"n other words," remarked Matherfield, "he was pretty well known about
this end of the trand.  'm not sure, now, that  don't remember such
a man myselfblack, silky, carefullytrimmed beard, always a big
swell.  utMr. Macpherson hasn't seen him lately  m  o you know
if he was in practice, Mr. Macpherson"

" could not say as to that, Mr. Matherfield.  eeing that he called
himself r. mbrose,  supposed he was a medical practitioner, but 
don't know what his degrees or ualifications were at all."

Matherfield glanced at a row of books which stood over a desk at the
side of the parlour.

"ave you got an uptodate medical directory" he asked.  "ood
Let's look the man up.  You turn up his name, Mr. etherwick," he went
on as the chemist handed down a volume "you're more used to books than
 am.  ind out if there's anything about him."

etherwick turned over the pages of the directory, and presently shook
his head.

"There's no harles mbrose here," he said.  "Look for yourselves."

Matherfield glanced at the place indicated and said nothing.
Macpherson made an exclamation of surprise.

"ye, well, he may be a foreigner, after all," he observed.  "ut 
shouldn't have considered him one, and he certainly told me he was an
xford graduate."

"oreigner or xforder, 'm going to know more about him" declared
Matherfield, rising and grasping his stick with an air of
determination.  "ell, Mr. Macpherson, we're obliged to you, and if
this results in anythingyou know  ut for the momenta bit of that
caution that you cotsmen are famous foreh"

utside, Matherfield laid his hand on etherwick's elbow.

"Mr. etherwick," he said solemnly, "we're on the trackat last  ure
as my name's Matherfield, we've hit the trail  ow we're going to ohn
treet, delphiand 'll lay you anything you like that the man's
vanished"




T 

T TLM

etherwick followed his companion across the trand, into the delphi,
and to the house they wantedan old dams mansion, now divided into
flats.  Matherfield did not take the trouble to ascend to the upper
regions he sought and found a caretaker and put a uestion to him.
The man shook his head.

"r. mbrose, sir" he replied.  "h, yes, r. mbrose lives here.
ut he ain't in, sirain't at home, in fact.  e's been away three
weeks or sodon't know where he is."

ith a meaning look at etherwick, Matherfield drew the caretaker aside
and talked to him for a few moments the man presently turned and went
downstairs to the basement from which they had summoned him.

"That's all right," remarked Matherfield, with a wink.  "e's going to
let us into mbrose's flat.  idn't  tell you we shouldn't find
mbrose here  ot he   should say he's off"

"upposing he returnswhile we're here" asked etherwick.

"ish he would" chuckled Matherfield.  "obody  want to see more  f
he did, why,  should ust ask him to take a little walk with meto
explain a few matters.  ut he won't  ere's the man.  e'll go up."

The caretaker reappeared with a bunch of keys and led the way to a flat
at the top of the old house.  e unlocked a door and stood aside.

"You needn't wait," said Matherfield.  "'ll shut the place up again
when we leave and let you know.  ll right."

e walked in, with etherwick at his heels, as soon as the caretaker
had gone, and, once inside, closed the door carefully upon himself and
his companion.  ut etherwick, after a first glance at the
sittingroom into which they had entered, a somewhat untidy, shabbily
furnished place, went straight to the hearth and pointed to a framed
photograph, timestained and faded, which hung over the mantelpiece.

"There's a striking and significant piece of evidenceat once" he
exclaimed.  "o you know what that is, Matherfield"

Matherfield looked in the direction indicated, and shook his head.

"ot the slightest idea" he answered.  " see it's a photograph of
some old church or otherthat's all."

"That's the famous arish hurch of ellithwaite" said etherwick.
"ne of the very finest in ngland   had a look at itonly a mere
lookwhen  was down there.  ow then, what's this man doing with a
picture of ellithwaite arish hurch in his rooms  annaford came
from ellithwaite"

"That's a mighty significant thing, anyway," agreed Matherfield.
"e're getting at something this morning" e looked more carefully at
the photograph.  "rand old building, as you say," he continued.  "f
course, the mere fact of his having it put up there shows that he's
some interest in it.  ellithwaite man, likely.  ut we'll find all
that out.  ow let's look round."

There was little to see, etherwick thought.  The flat consisted of a
sittingroom and bedroom and a small bathroom.  The furniture was
plain, old, rather shabby the whole place suggested that its occupant
was not over welltodo the only signs of affluence to be seen were
manifested in the toilet articles on the dressingtable, in a
luxurious, if wellworn, dressinggown which hung on the rail of the
bed, and in the presence of carefully folded and pressed garments laid
out in the bedroom.  There were a few books, chiefly medical treatises,
in shelves in the sittingroom a few personal pictures, mainly of
college and school groups, on the walls and a desk in the centre,
littered with more books, writing materials, and papers.  Matherfield
began to turn them over.

"ee that" he exclaimed suddenly, pointing to a movable calendar which
stood on the top ledge of the desk.  "otice the date  March th
That's the day on which annaford got his uietus.  t least, strictly
speaking, it was the day before.  annaford actually died on the
nineteenthaboutwhat was itvery early in the morning, anyway.
hat's one to gather from thisthat mbrose hasn't been here since
the eighteenth.  ohallo"

Turning over the loose papers that lay about the blottingpad, he had
suddenly lighted upon a telegram ust as suddenly he thrust it into
etherwick's hands.

"Look at that" he exclaimed.  "ow, that is a find  iggest we've
ever hadso far"

etherwick read the apparently innocent message.


"ll right.  ill meet you ictoria bookstall this evening as
suggested.

"annaford."


"ee the date" said Matherfield excitedly.  "March th  ow we've
got at it  mbrose was the man that met annaford at ictoria, the
tall, muffledup man that Ledbitter saw  That'scertain"

"eems so," agreed etherwick.  e was still studying the telegram.
"ent off from leet treet twelvefifteen that day," he muttered.
"Yesthere doesn't seem much doubt about this.   wonder who this man
mbrose is"

"e'll soon get to know something about that, Mr. etherwick"
exclaimed Matherfield briskly.  "ow, 'm ust going to put that wire
in my pocket, lock up this flat again, have another word or two with
that caretaker chap, and go in search of the information you refer to.
ome with me  Later,  shall get a search warrant, and make a thorough
examination of this flat.  Let's be moving."

ownstairs again, Matherfield called up the caretaker.

"You say r. mbrose has been away for a bit" he asked.  "s there
anything unusual in that"

"ell, not so very," answered the man.  "ver since he came here, two
or three years ago, he's been used to going away for a while.  
believe he used to go over to aris.  ut  never remember him being
away more than a week at a time before."

"vidently he's a doctor," suggested Matherfield.  "id he ever have
patients come to see him here"

The caretaker shook his head.

"o," he replied.  "e never had anybody much come to see him
herenever remember anybody, unless it was somebody he brought in at
night for a smoke, you know.  e generally went out early in a morning,
and came home latevery late."

"hat about his meals" asked Matherfield.

"e'd no meals hereunless he made himself a cup of coffee or so in a
morning," said the caretaker.  "ll his meals outbreakfast, too.
undays as well as weekdays.  e saw very little of him."

"ho does up his roomsmakes the bed and so on" inuired Matherfield.

"My wife," answered the caretaker.  "he does all that."

"nd she hasn't had anything to do forhow long"

"ell, it'll be three weeks, 'm sure.  e never used to say anything
at any time when he went offust went.  e'd call downstairs when he
came back and let us know he was back, d'ye see  ut we never thought
he'd be as long away as this, this time.  t was only this morning,
ust before you came, that my missus said to me that it seemed ueer."

"hy ueer"

"ecause he's taken nothing with him.  owever short a time he might be
away before, he always took a suitcase, clean linen, shaving things,
so onhe was a very particular gentleman about his appearancealways
dressed like a swell and had a clean shirt every day used to have a
nice heavy washingbill, anyhow"

"id he seem to be pretty well supplied with money" asked Matherfield.
"rthe opposite"

"ouldn't rightly say," replied the caretaker.  "lways paid his rent,
and us, and the washing regular, but as for anything else, why, we'd no
means of knowing.  f course, as  tell you, he always looked the
gentleman."

" see" said Matherfield.  "ll rightyou'll see me again this
afternoon."

e strode away towards the trand, and there ushered etherwick into
the first empty taxicab they met.

"here now" asked etherwick as Matherfield followed him into the cab
after a word to its driver.

"e're going now, sir, to allam treet, to the offices of the eneral
Medical ouncil," answered Matherfield promptly.  "'ve had experience
of inuiring into the antecedents of medical men before, and  know
where to find out all about any of 'em.  'm going to find out all
about this r. harles mbrosethat is, of course, if he's an nglish
doctor."

"robably he isn't," remarked etherwick, "any more than aseverie is."

"h, aseverie" exclaimed Matherfield.  "'d forgotten that man for
the time being  ell, while we're about it, we'll see if we can
unearth a bit of information concerning him.  e've done a bit of good
work this morning, ye know, Mr. etherwick" he went on, rubbing his
hands with satisfaction.  "e've practically made certain that mbrose
was the man who met annaford at ictoria, and we're sure he's the man
to whom Macpherson supplied the bottle in which the poison was
discovered at ranett's room.  nd now we'll hope for a bit more
illumination in the darkness"

etherwick presently found himself closeted with Matherfield and a
grave official who, after seeing Matherfield's credentials and
listening to his reasons for his visit of inuiry, began to consult
various books of reference.  resently he left the room and was away
some time when he returned he brought with him two slips of paper,
which he handed to Matherfield.

" have had the particulars you reuire written out for you," he said,
"so you can examine them at your leisure.  " here he smiled
frostily" gather that you are somewhat anxious to get in touch with
these men"

" think it's extremely probable, sir, that before the day's over 
shall be exceedingly anxious to get in touch with both" answered
Matherfield, with something very like a wink.  "More than anxious"

The grave official nodded and smiled again, and Matherfield and
etherwick went away.  utside Matherfield looked right and left.

"Mr. etherwick," he said, "it's well past twelve, and 'd my breakfast
before eight'm hungry  Let's turn into the first decent place we
see and get a bite and a sup  nd we'll examine these papers."

e presently led etherwick into the saloon bar of a tavern, and
remarking that he had a taste for ale and bread and cheese at that time
of day, provided himself with these matters and retreated to a snug
corner, whither etherwick followed him with a whisky and soda.

"ere's success to our endeavours, Mr. etherwick" said Matherfield,
lifting his tankard.  "'m now firmly under the impression that we're
adding link after link to the chain  ut let's see what we've got here
in this crabbed writing."

e laid the slips of paper on the table at which they sat both bent
over them.  There were not many words on either, but to etherwick they
were significant enough in their plain straightforwardness.


harles mbrose, M..  xon.  Medical fficer of ealth, rayport,
Lancs,  in practice hiteburn, Lancs,  police
surgeon, ellithwaite, .., Yorks,  in practice rondesbury,
London, .  truck off egister by eneral Medical ouncil for
unprofessional conduct, .


"o much for him" muttered Matherfield, his cheek bulging with bread
and cheese.  " thought it would turn out to be something of that sort
ow t'other"


yprian aseverie, L...., L....  n practice irmingham,
 at yborough, orthants,  at alston, .,
, onvicted of fraud at entral riminal ourt, , and
struck off egister by eneral Medical ouncil, .


"oho" exclaimed Matherfield.  "een in the dock already, has he
ell, well, Mr. etherwick, we continue to learn, sir  e know still
more.  aseverie's a convicted criminal.  oth have been struck off the
register.  mbrose was certainly at ellithwaiteand he'd be there,
according to these dates, at the time of the hittingham affair.  
promising pairfor our purpose  hat do you think"

"'m wondering if the two men know each other," answered etherwick.

"houldn't wonder," said Matherfield.  "robably they do.  robably
they're mixed up together in this affair.  robably they're actual
partners in itaccessories to each other.  ut now that  know this
much about them,  can find out more, especially about mbrose, as he
was a police surgeon.   can find out, too, what aseverie's particular
crime was.  efrauding a patient,  should imagine.  ut 'll put one
or two men on to working up particulars and records of both aseverie
and mbrose this afternoon, and, of course,  shall go back and
thoroughly examine that flat in ohn treet."

"nd,  suppose, in view of the evidence supplied by Macpherson, set up
a search for mbrose" suggested etherwick.

"To be sure  e'll get out a 'tracked by the police' notice,
describing him to the best of our power," replied Matherfield.  "ut
'll tell youin my opinion it'll be a stiff ob getting hold of him.
f you want my opinion, as a private individual, he's probably got that
secret invention of annaford's and gone off across the tlantic with
itto turn it into money."

"That's very likely," assented etherwick.  "ut what about aseverie"

"'m not so much concerned about him now," said Matherfield.  "mbrose
seems to be the man  wantfirst, anyway.  ut  shall do what  can
to get hold of aseverie.  f these enteney and lenkinsop people had
only come to us instead of laying plans of their own, some good would
have been done.   shouldn't have let the man got away"

"My belief," observed etherwick, "is that aseverie and mbrose are
partners in this affair.  ndhow do we know that they didn't meet at
over, and that they haven't gone off together"

till wondering about this, etherwick next morning went round to
Lincoln's nn ields and asked to see one of the partners.  e was
shown into the room in which he and Matherfield had had their interview
on the previous day.  ut he found Maor enteney alone.  lenkinsop,
remarked the unior partner, had business in the ourts that morning.

" called," explained etherwick, "to ask if you had any more
information about aseverie's disappearance at over."

enteney made a wry face.

"More vexed than ever about that" he answered.  "Most inexcusably
stupid conduct on the part of our manman we've always found so
reliable previously.  e came back yesterday afternoon, crestfallen,
told us all about it, and got a olly good wigging.  e'd done well at
first.  Tracked his man from iversreade ourt to orking, and thence
to edhill, and thence to over, after one or two changes.  aseverie
put up at some hotel forget whichnear the harbour our man,
certain that aseverie was uite unconscious that he was being
followed, put up there, too.  othing happened.  e saw aseverie at
dinner that night, saw him in the smokingroom after in fact, he had a
game of billiards with him, and saw him retire to bed their rooms were
adacent.  e felt sure of seeing him at breakfast, but when he went
down he found that the bird had flownflown, said the night porter,
before six o'clock he didn't know where.  or could our man trace him
at station or pier, or anywhere."

"areless sort of watching," said etherwick.

"orse than careless" agreed enteney.  "s  said, he caught it hot.
ut now"

The telephone bell on lenkinsop's desk rang.  ith a word of excuse
enteney turned to it.   moment later a smothered eaculation of
surprise came from him, followed by a sharp interrogation on his part.
uddenly he turned on etherwick.

"ood heavens" he exclaimed.  "hat's all this  This is Lady
iversreade speaking.  he says her sister, who came yesterday, and
Miss eatherstone have been kidnapped  idnappedthis morning"

etherwick leapt to his feet with a sharp exclamationhalf amaed,
half incredulous.  ut already his thoughts were with hona he saw the
dangers of the situation for her as enteney could not see them.

"mpossible" he said.  "idnapped in broad daylight  ndfrom
there"

ut enteney was still busy at the telephone, giving and receiving
rapid answers.

"Yes, yes" he was saying.  "To be surepoliceyes  'm coming
straight there nowcartell the police to get busy."

e turned sharply to etherwick as he laid down the instrument.

"ear there's no impossibility about it" he said.  "Lady iversreade
says they were carried off as they crossed from the ourt to the
omeshe's heard something of a big car with strange men in it.  'm
going down there at oncethere's more in this affair than one sees at
first."

"'ll come with you," said etherwick.  "here can we get a cara fast
one"

"arage close by, in ingsway," answered enteney, hurriedly seiing on
one of several greatcoats that hung in a recess.  "ereget into one
of theseyou're about my height, and the air's still nippy, motoring.
ow come onwe'll be there in under the hour.  You know," he
continued, as they left the office and hastened towards ingsway, "
think  see through something of this already, etherwick.  These
fellows probably believed they were kidnapping Lady iversreadeand
got her sister in mistake for her.  ansom, you know  The blackmailing
dodge failednow they're trying this.   desperate and daredevil lot,
evidently"

etherwick nodded a silent assent.  e was wondering whether or not to
tell enteney that the Miss eatherstone of whom he had ust spoken was
in reality the granddaughter of the man whose mysterious murder
appeared to be the startingpoint of the more recent, eually
mysterious events.  That fact, it seemed to him, would have to come out
sooner or laterand there might be possible complications, perhaps
unpleasantness, when Lady iversreade discovered that hona had gone to
her as a spy.  Might it not be well to take enteney into his
confidence and explain matters  ut, on reflection, he decided to wait
until they knew the exact situation at iversreade ourt so far, in
spite of Lady iversreade's news he felt it difficult to believe that
two women, one of them, to his knowledge, a girl of character and
resource, and the other a woman of the world, used to travelling and to
adventure, could be carried off in broad daylight in immediate prospect
of two large housesthe thing seemed impossible.




T 

T L 

ome fifty minutes later, the big, powerful car, which enteney had
commissioned in ingsway, dashed up to iversreade ourt.  etherwick
found that there had been no exaggeration in Lady iversreade's
telephone message.  he herself came hurrying out to meet them there
were men standing about the terrace outside and others visible in the
park a couple of uniformed policemen followed Lady iversreade from
her study, where etherwick supposed her to have been in consultation
with them.  nd her first glance was directed on etherwick himself
she addressed him before enteney could go through any hurried
introduction.

"'ve seen you before" she exclaimed abruptly.  "You were with my
secretary, Miss eatherstone, at ictoria, unday morning.  re you
engaged to her"

"o" replied etherwick.  "ut we are close friends."

"ell, Miss eatherstone's been run away withand so has my sister,
Madame Listorelle," continued Lady iversreade.  "That's the long and
short of it  You seemed almost incredulous when  rang you up," she
continued, turning to enteney, "but there's no doubt about itthey've
been kidnapped, under my very windows.  nd we haven't a single clue, a
trace of any sort."

"o far, you mean," answered enteney coolly.  "ut comebut let me
hear all about it.  hat are the details"

"etails" exclaimed Lady iversreade.  "e don't know any details
ll  know is thismy sister came here from ampshire yesterday
evening, to stay a few days.  This morning, after we had breakfasted,
she and Miss eatherstone set out across the park for the ome, leaving
me here meant to follow in a few minutes.   did follow wasn't
ten minutes behind them.  ut when  got to the ome, they weren't
there, and Mitchell, the man at the door, said they hadn't come.  They
didn't come  ventually,  came back here, to find out if something
had happened and they'd returned by some other way.  ut they weren't
here.  Then  began to make some inuiry.  ne of the housemaids, who'd
been looking out of a top window, said she'd seen a car go at a great
rate down the middle drive in the direction of the high road soon after
Madame Listorelle and Miss eatherstone left the house.  nd of course
there's no doubt about itthey've been carried off in that  This is
more work of that man aseverie's"

"You said something over the 'phone about strange men being seen in the
car," remarked enteney.

"h, thatyes, the same girl said she thought she could see two men
sitting in the car," answered Lady iversreade.  "f course they'd be
strange."

enteney turned to the policemen, at the same time tapping etherwick's
arm.  " think we'd better go across the park and see for ourselves if
there are any signs of a struggle at any particular place," he said.
" don't think either Madame Listorelle or Miss eatherstone likely
persons to be carried off without making a fight for it.  ave you been
across the grounds yet" he added, to the elder of the two men.  "
mean by the path they took"

"ot yet, sir we've only ust arrived," answered the man.

"ome along, then," said enteney.  e lingered a moment as etherwick
and the policemen left the hall, and said a few words to Lady
iversreade then he hurried out and headed his party.  "This way," he
continued, leading etherwick along the terrace, " know the usual
route to the omeplain sailing from here to there, except at one
spot, and there,  conclude, whatever has happened did happen"

etherwick paid particular attention to the route along which enteney
led his party.  The path went straight across the park, from the end of
the terrace at the ourt to near the front entrance of the ome, and
from the ourt itself it looked as if there was no break in it.  ut
about halfway between the two houses there was an important break
which could not be seen until pedestrians were close upon it.
Transecting the park from its southern to its northern boundaries was a
sunk roadwaythe middle drive to which Lady iversreade had
referredgained from the park above, on each side, by ornamental
steps.  hatever happened in that roadway, etherwick saw at once,
could not have been seen from the higher ground above, save by anyone
close to its edge.  ut two or three hundred yards or so from the
steps, which made a continuation of the path, the embankments of the
sunk road flattened out into the lower stretches of the park, and there
the road itself could be seen from the top windows of the ourt, and
from those of the ome also.

enteney paused at the top of the ornamental steps.

"f these two ladies have been carried off, as they certainly seem to
have been," he said, turning to his companions, "this is the spot
ow, ust let me explain the lie of the land.  The main road edges the
park at the northern end, as you all know.  ut there is a good road at
the southern extremity, and the sunk road runs down from it.   car
could come down from there, be pulled up here, and kept waiting until
the two ladies came along.  They would have to descend these steps,
cross the road, and ascend the steps on the other bank to get to the
other half of the park.  ow suppose they're forced into a car at the
foot of the stepsthe car goes off for the main road and gets clear
away within a minute or two of the kidnapping taking place  There's
the difficulty  The thing would be easy to dogranted force.
robably, the two captives were forced into the car at the point of
revolvers."

"That's about it, sir" agreed the elder of the policemen.  "o choice
in the matter, poor things  nd, as you say, they'd be in and
offmiles offbefore they fairly knew what had happened."

"ome down and let's see the roadway," said enteney.

ut there was nothing to see at the foot of the steps.  The road, like
all roads and paths on the iversreade ourt property, was in a perfect
state of repair, and there was scarcely a grain of dust on its
spickandspan, artificially treated and smoothed surface certainly
there were no signs of any struggle.

"That's how it's been, you may depend upon it," observed enteney to
etherwick as they looked about.  "The men were waiting here with
revolvers.  They'd force them into the car and get in after them a
third man, an accomplice, would drive off.  f only we had some more
definite information about the car and its occupants"

"There's an old chap coming down the road who seems to have his eye on
us," remarked etherwick, looking round.  "e may have something to
tell.  fter all, some of the people hereabouts must have seen the car"

The old man, evidently a labourer, came nearer, looking inuiringly
from one to the other.  e had the air of one who can tell something on
occasion.

"e you gentlemen aenuirin' about a motycar what was round here this
mornin'" he asked, as he came up.  " hear there was somebody aaskin'
uestions that way, so  ust come downalong, like."

"e are," answered enteney.  "o you know anything"

The old man pointed up the sunk road to a part of the park where it was
lost amongst trees and coppices.

"Lives up there,  do," he said.  "My cottage, it be ust behind they
trees, t'other side o' the road what this here runs into my garden, it
runs down to the edge o' that road.  nd when  was agardenin' this
morningmebbe 'bout halfpastnine o'clock, that was sees a
motycar what come along from your way, and turns into this here sunk
road.  Mebbe that's what you're atalkin' 'bout"

"o doubt," agreed enteney.  "nd we're much obliged to you.  ow what
sort of a car was it  losed, or open"

"h, 'twas closed up, same as one o' they old cabs what us don't see no
more now," said the old man.  "ut  see inside it, for all that.  Two
gentlemen."

"Two gentlemen, eh" repeated enteney.  "ust so.  nd a driver
outside, of course."

"h, aye there was a driver outside, to be sure.  n livery, he
waslike a gentleman's servant.  mart feller"

"ould you describe the gentlemen"

"o, surelytwo gentlemen, though asitting back,  sees 'em  nd
sees the motycar, too, turn down this here very road."

"hat sort of car was it" inuired enteney.  "hat colour was it
painted"

"ell, now, you beats me  t med be a sort o' greyish colouror
again, it med be a sort o' yaller, lightish yaller, or it med be
drabbish couldn' 'ac'ly go to for say what it was, proper.  ut a
lightish colour."

"Lightishgrey, yellow, or drabsomething of that sort"

"urely  er wasn't a dark 'un, anyhow.  ut the feller what drove,
now he were in a dark livery took partic'lar notice of he, 'cause he
was so smart as never was.  reen that was his colour, and gold lace.
Looked like a duke, he did  nd  thought, hearin' as there was them
in the park as was inuirin', like, as 'ow 'd come and tell 'ee."

enteney rewarded the informant with some silver, and turned to his
companions with a shake of the head.

" lightcoloured car with two men in it, driven by a man who wore a
darkgreen livery with gold lace on it" he remarked.  "That's about
all we're likely to get.  ndif this has been a carefullyplanned
affair, the chauffeur would change his livery before they'd gone
farslip another coat on  owever"

They went back to the ourt, consulting together obviously, there was
nothing to do but to send out inuiries in the surrounding country.
enteney was sceptical about the success of these.

"hen one considers the thousands of cars to be seen in any given area
during one morning," he said, "how can one expect that anybody, even
rustics, should give special attention to any particular one  There's
no doubt about itthey've got clean away"

t seemed as if nothing could be done but to give the kidnapping full
publicity through the police and the press.  n the neighbourhood of
the ourt nobody beyond the housemaid and the old cottager appeared to
have seen the car and its occupants.  ut during the afternoon, as
etherwick and enteney were about to set out for London, a man came to
the house and asked to see Lady iversreade.  Lady iversreade went out
to him the two men accompanied her, and found at the hall door an
elderly, respectablelooking fellow who had driven up in a light cart.
e had heard, he said, of what had happened at iversreade ourt that
morning, and he believed he could tell something, for he was sure that
he had seen a car, such as that the police were inuiring after, pass
his house.

"nd where is that" asked Lady iversreade.

"bout two miles the other side of orking, my lady, on the London
oad.  'm a market gardenername of Thomas hillam.  nd  was
outside my garden gate this morning, about, as near as  can reckon,
ten o'clock, when  saw a car, lightcoloured, coming from orking, at
a particularly high speeda good deal faster than it had any right to
do   watched it careful, my lady.  ut ust as it got near to my
place, there was a man drove some sheep out of a bylane, a few yards
past my garden and the car was obliged to slow down.  nd so  saw the
folks in it."

"Yes" said Lady iversreade.  "ndwho was in it"

"There was a couple of men, my lady, on the front seat, and a couple of
ladies in the back.  f course, it was a closed car, but  saw 'em,
plain enough, all four.  t seemed to me as if they were all either
uarrelling or having high wordsthey were all talking together,
anyway.  ut though the car had slowed down 'cause of the sheep, it was
still moving at a fair pace, and, of course, they were past and gone,
London way, in a minute, as it were.  ll the same,  saw 'em clearly
enough to see that one of the men inside was a man 've seen before."

"bout here" exclaimed Lady iversreade.

"o, my lady," answered hillam.  "n London.  t's this way, my
ladyme and my missis, we've a grownup daughter what's in service in
Londonrosvenor ardens.  ow and again we go up to see her, and stop
a night or two close by.  nd of course we take a look round.  ow 've
seen that man two or three times about ictoria tation way knew him
at once when  saw him this morning, and"

"ust tell us what he's like, will you" interrupted enteney.  "s
near as you can."

"ell, sir,  ain't good at that, but he's a tall, goodlooking,
smartdressed gentleman, with a beard and moustachetaller nor what
you and that other gentleman is, sir.   seen him in ictoria
treetmebbe it was his height made me notice him."

"nd you're sure that was the man you saw in the car this morning"

"Make no doubt on it, sir  'm as certain as that  see yourself.  h,
yes"

etherwick put in a uestion.

"The second man in the car  id you notice him  an you remember him"

hillam reflected for awhile.

" remember that he was a whitefaced chap," he said at last.  "ore a
tophat, silk."

hen hillam had gone away, etherwick turned to his companions.

"That sounds like mbrose, for one man, and aseverie for the other,"
he said.  "hat devilry are they up to now  enteneywe must get back
to London"




T 

 T

t was an hour later when they pulled up at Matherfield's headuarters
and went in to find him.  Matherfield, brought to them after some
search, rubbed his hands at sight of them.

"ome at the right moment" he exclaimed, "'ve got newsof mbrose"

Matherfield evidently expected his visitors to show deep interest, if
not passive enthusiasm, in respect of this announcement, and he stared
wonderingly on seeing that their faces showed nothing but gloom and
concern.

"ut youyou look as if you'd had bad news" he exclaimed.  "omething
gone wrong"

" forgot that we might have telephoned you from iversreade ourt,"
replied etherwick, suddenly realising that Matherfield seemed to know
nothing of the day's happening.  "ut  thought the orking police
would do that.  one wrongyes, and it may have to do with
mbrosewe've heard news that seems to fit in with him.  ut it's
this," he went on to give Matherfield a brief account of the day's
events.  "There you are" he concluded.  "'ve no doubt whatever that
aseverie and mbrose are in at thiskidnapping in broad daylight.
Matherfield, you've got to find them"

Matherfield had listened with close attention to etherwick's story,
and now he looked from him to enteney from enteney to a printed bill
which lay on his desk at his side.  " think  see what all this is
about," he remarked, after a pause.  "Those chaps think they've gotor
they thought they gotLady iversreade  To hold for ransom, of
course.  They took Miss annaford because she chanced to be there.
hat they really kidnappedand there's more of that done than you
gentlemen might think,  can tell youwas Lady iversreade's sister.
ut now, however sisterstwin sistersmay closely resemble each
other, there comes a time when difference of identity's bound to come
out.  y this timeperhaps long beforethose men must have discovered
that they laid hands on the wrong woman  nd the uestion iswhat
would they do then"

"t seems to me that the more immediate uestion iswhere are the two
women" exclaimed etherwick.  "Think of their danger"

"h, well, Mr. etherwick,  don't suppose they're in any personal
danger," answered Matherfield.  "They're in the hands of brigands, no
doubt, but  don't think there'll be any maltreatment of themset your
mind at rest about that.  They don't do that sort of thing nowadays
it's all done politely and with every consideration,  believe.  s to
where they are  hy, somewhere in London  nd there are over seven
millions of other people in London, and hundreds upon hundreds of
thousands of inhabited housesa lot of needles in that bundle of hay,
gentlemen"

"They've got to be found" repeated etherwick doggedly.  "You'll have
to set all your machinery to work  This can't"

"ait a bit, etherwick," interrupted enteney.  e turned to
Matherfield.  "You said you had news of this man mbrose  hat news"

Matherfield tapped the printed bill which lay on his desk.

" had that circulated broadcast this morning," he answered.  "nd
then, of course, the newspapers have helped.  ell, not so very long
before you came in,  was called to the telephone by a man named
illiner, who told me he was the landlord of the reen rcher Tavern,
in ood treet, estminster"

"estminster again" exclaimed etherwick.  "That seems to be the
centre point"

"nd a very good thing to have a centrepoint, Mr. etherwick," said
Matherfield.  "hen things begin to narrow down, one gets some chance.
ell,  was sayingthis man rang me up to say that if 'd go down
there he thought he could give me some information relative to the bill
about the missing man.  hat he'd got to say, he said, was too long for
a telephone talk.   answered that 'd be with him shortly, and  was
ust setting off when you arrived.  f course,  don't know what he can
tellit may be nothing, it may be something.  erhaps you gentlemen
would like to go with me and hear what it is"

" would, but  mustn't," replied enteney.  " must go to my office
and hear if Lady iversreade or the local police have had any fresh
news.  eep in touch with me, though, Matherfieldlet me know what you
hear."

"'ll go with you," said etherwick.  "estminster" he muttered again,
when enteney had gone.  "t looks as if this man mbrose was known in
that district."

"Likely" assented Matherfield.  "ut you know, Mr. etherwick, there
are some ueer spots in that uarter  eople who know the purely
ornamental parts of estminster, such as the bbey, and the ouses of
arliament, and ictoria treet, and so on, don't know that there are
some fine old slums behind 'em  ut 'll show you when we get down
there.  e shall go through one or two savoury slices."

e was putting on his overcoat as he spoke, in readiness for setting
out, but before he had buttoned it a constable entered with a card.

"ants to see you particularly, and at once," he said.  "aiting
outside."

"ring him instraight" answered Matherfield.  e pushed the card
along his desk in etherwick's direction.  "Lord Morradale" he
exclaimed.  "ho's he"

"The man who's engaged to Madame Listorelle," replied etherwick, in an
undertone.  "ampshire magnate."

Matherfield turned expectantly to the open door.   shortish, stoutish
person, who looked more like a typical ity man, prosperous and
satisfied, came hustling in and gave etherwick and his companion a
sharp, inuiring glance which finally settled on Matherfield.

"Mr. Matherfield" he asked.  "ust so  'm Lord Morradaleoh, of
course,  sent in my cardust so  ell, Mr. Matherfield, 've had an
extraordinary communication from Lady iversreade.  he telephoned to
my house in ill treet this morning, but  was down in the ity, and
didn't hear of her message till late this afternoon.  he says her
sister, Madame Listorelle, has been kidnapped
idnappedpreposterous"

"'m afraid it's neither preposterous nor improbable, my lord,"
answered Matherfield.  "'m uite sure Madame Listorelle has been
kidnapped, and Lady iversreade's secretary, Miss eatherstone, with
her.  've been down at iversreade ourt most of the day, and there's
no doubt about itthe two ladies were carried off from there by three
men in a fast car, which was driven towards London.  That's a fact"

"od bless my soul" exclaimed Lord Morradale.  "n broad daylight
Twentieth century, too  nd is there no clue"

"one so far, my lord.  f course, we've noised the affair as much as
possible, and all our people are on the look out.  ut it's a difficult
case," continued Matherfield.  "The probability is that the ladies have
been rushed to some house in London and that they're there in
captivity.  f course, one theory is that the kidnappers took Madame
Listorelle for her sister.  They meant to get Lady iversreade and hold
her to ransom."

Lord Morradale pursed his lips.  Then he rubbed his chin.  Then he
shook his head.  inally he gave etherwick a shrewd glance, eyeing him
from head to foot.

"m" he said.  "h  This gentleman  ot one of your people,  think,
Matherfield"

"o, my lord.  This gentleman is Mr. etherwick, of the Middle Temple,
who is interested very deeply in certain matters connected with the
affair.  Mr. etherwick has been down to iversreade with me, and your
lordship can speak freely before him."

Lord Morradale gave etherwick a friendly, knowing nod.  Then he
glanced at the door, and Matherfield made haste to close it.

"Thank 'ee," said Lord Morradale.  "ust as well to be in private.
'm think 'd better tell you something, Matherfield.   dare say
that's a reasonable supposition of yoursthat these villains took
Madame Listorelle for her sister.  ut  don't think they did.   think
they knew very well whom they were seiing.  Mind youthey'd have
seied Lady iversreade too if she'd happened to be there.  ut it was
madame they were after"

"f your lordship would explain" suggested Matherfield.

"'m going toit's what  come here for   think  can ust put you
on the right scent.  You may have heard that Madame Listorelle and 
are about to marry  ery well,  accordingly knew a good deal about
her affairs.  ow,  don't know whether you know or not that Madame
Listorelle is actively concernedor has beenin buying and selling
ewels on commission  That's her speciality."

"eard something of it, my lord," replied Matherfield.

"ery well.  ow, uite recently Madame Listorelle bought up in aris a
magnificent set of stones which had been at one time the property of a
member of the ussian mperial family.  he brought them here to
London, meaning, shortly, either to send or take them personally to
merica to her customer.  This deal, unfortunately, got into the
papers.  ow, it's my belief that these fellows have kidnapped madame
in order to get hold of these ewels.  o you see"

"h" exclaimed Matherfield.  " see, my lord  That puts a new aspect
on the case.  utsurely Madame Listorelle wouldn't have the stones on
her"

Lord Morradale winkeddeliberatelyat both his hearers.

"o" he said.  "oshe wouldn't.  ut the scoundrels would figure on
thisthat when she was fairly in their power they would be in a
position to make her give them upto force her, in short, to disclose
their whereabouts.  f they're desperate villains, not likely to stick
at anything,  think they'll have forced madame to complianceand in
doing so give you a chance to lay hands on them"

"ow, my lord" asked Matherfield eagerly.

Lord Morradale gave the two men a confidential glance.

"This way," he replied.  "The ewels were deposited, for safety, by
Madame Listorelle at the mperial afe eposit.  he rents a safe
there.  ow, don't you see what 'm suggesting  These men may force
her to give them the necessary key and a signed order to the safe
people to let the bearer open madame's safe and take away a certain
case in which the ewels are packed.  That's what  think will be done.
nd what you ought to do is to see the mperial afe eposit officials
at once, warn them of what  suggest may happen, and take your own
means of watching for such a messenger arriving, and for tracking him
when he departs.  h"

"r arresting him there and then," said Matherfield.

"o,  shouldn't" declared Lord Morradale.  "'m not a policeman, you
know, but  can give a hint to one.  nstead of arresting the manwho,
you must remember, will be sure to have madame's written authority on
himthat is if things turn out as  suggest should carefully follow
him.  orhe'll probably go back to where madame and the young lady,
Miss hat'shername, are detained  h"

Matherfield shook his head.

" should doubt that, my lord" he answered.  "f things work out as
you suggest,and it's a highly probable theorythat's about the last
thing he would do  nce the ewels were in his possession"

"You forget this," interrupted Lord Morradale.  "They may use a
catspaw  h"

"ell, there's that in it, certainly," assented Matherfield.  "owever,
'll see that the mperial afe eposit people are warned and that this
entrance is carefully watched tomorrow morning.  utthe thing may
have been done already  There's been plenty of time since the ladies
were carried off."

"o" said Lord Morradale.  "othing's happened so far.   called in at
the mperial afe eposit as  came here they had neither seen Madame
Listorelle nor had any communication from her today.  nd now the
place is closed for the night."

"id you warn them, then" inuired Matherfield.

" didn't.   thought it best to see you first," replied Lord
Morradale.  "The warning and the rest of it will come best from you."

"ery good, my lord.  Much obliged to your lordship for looking in,"
said Matherfield.  "e'll keep you posted up in anything that
happensat ill treet.  ow," he continued, when Lord Morradale had
left the office, "we'll get along to estminster, Mr. etherwick, to
the 'reen rcher' and its landlord, illiner."

The "reen rcher" proved to be a respectable tavern which boasted a
saloon bar.  ehind the glass screens of this they found a middleaged,
sharpeyed man, who at the sight of his visitors immediately opened the
door of a parlour in the rear and ushered them into privacy.  e
pointed silently to a copy of the bill asking for news of mbrose.

"ye" said Matherfield.  "ust so.   had your message.  You think you
know this man"

"rom this description of him in that bill, yes," replied the landlord.
" think he's a mangentleman, by all appearanceswho used to come
into my saloon bar pretty regularly during this last six months.  ince
the end of last summer,  should say, up to about three weeks or so
ago."

"ot since then, eh" asked Matherfield.  "Three weeks"

"bout that.  ohe hasn't been in for uite that.  ut up to then
he'd been in, well, four or five days a week.  andsome, fine manin
fact, you've described him exactly there.   never knew who he
wasused to pass the time o' day with him, you know, but that was all.
e always came in about the same timeone to onethirty.  e'd have
sometimes a glass of bitter ale and a sandwich or two sometimes a
whisky and soda and two or three biscuits.  tood and had his snack and
went away.  ever talked much.   took him for some gentleman that had
business hereabouts, and ust wanted a bite and a sup in the middle of
the day, and turned in here for it.  ut  don't know what business he
could be concerned in round here.  e hadn't the tradesman's look on
him, you understand.   should have said he was a professional man of
some sort.  lways very well dressed, you knowsmart.  owever,  did
notice one peculiar thing about him."

"hat now" asked Matherfield.  "t all helps"

"ell," said the landlord, " noticed that his hands and fingers were
stainedall sorts of colours.  ometimes it was more noticeable than
at others.  ut there it was."

"m" remarked Matherfield.  e exchanged a knowing glance with
etherwick.  nd when, a few minutes later, they left the tavern, he
turned to him with an air of assurance.  "'m beginning to feel the
end" he said.  "eel it, if  don't see it.  tained fingers, eh
e've heard of them before, Mr. etherwick.  nd 'll tell ye what it
is.  omewhere about this very spot there's some place where men are
dabblingsecretly,  should thinkwith chemicals, and mbrose is one
of 'em, and perhaps aseverie another, and it was there that annaford
and that man rannet had been that night, and where they were
poisonedand there, too, no doubt, these two ladies are at this
minute  ellcome to my place first thing in the morning."

etherwick, at a loss what to do further that night, went away and
dined, and, that done, strolled home to his chambers.  There was a
light in his parlour, and when he opened the door he found Mapperley,
evidently awaiting him, and with Mapperley a curlyheaded, bignosed,
beadyeyed young ew.




T 

T   T

etherwick realised at once that Mapperley had news, and was waiting
there to communicate it.  ut he looked not so much at Mapperley as at
Mapperley's companion.  Mapperley, as etherwick had remarked to more
than one person in the course of those proceedings, concealed his
sharpness under an unusually commonplace exterior he looked, as a
rule, like a young man whose ideas rarely soared above a low level.
ut the ew was of a different aspectetherwick was not uite sure
whether he was rat or ferret.  There was subtlety and craft written all
over him, from his bright beady eyes to his long, thin, dirty fingers,
and before Mapperley spoke his employer felt sure that in this son of
srael the clerk had found a valuable associate.

"ullo, Mapperley" exclaimed etherwick.  "aiting for me  You've
some news,  suppose"

Mapperley, grave and formal, pointed a finger at the ew.

"Mr. sidore oldmark, sir," he said.  "riend of mine.   got him to
give me a bit of assistance in this aseverie and ivian affair.  The
fact is, sir, he knows ivian'sdon't you, ssy"

"Thome" replied Mr. oldmark, with a grin.

"nd he knows aseverie, too," continued Mapperley.  "y sight, anyhow.
o  got himfor a considerationto watch for aseverie's next
appearance on that scene, and then, when he did come, to keep an eye on
himtrick him, in fact.  nd ssy's seen him tonight, Mr. etherwick,
and followed him.  Then ssy came to me, and  brought him here."

"ood" said etherwick.  "it down, both of you, and 'll hear about
it."  e dropped into his own easy chair and again regarding the ew
decided that he was probably a creditable witness.  "hat do you do at
ivian's" he asked.  "mployed there"

Mr. oldmark glanced at Mapperley and smiled knowingly.  Mapperley
nodded.

"ll confidential, ssy," he said reassuringly.  "oing no further."

"f course this is all confidentialand secret," remarked etherwick.
" only want to know the precise connection between ivian's and Mr.
oldmark."

"t'th a thort of themiofficial, mithter," answered the ew.  "The
fact ith,  do a bit o' commith'on work for ivian'th cuthtomerth, turf
you know.  Tho''m in and out of an evening.  Thee"

" see," said etherwick.  "ll right  nd you know aseverie"

"th well ath  know my own nothe," replied Mr. oldmark.

"ow long have you known him"

"Thome time."

"o you know what he is"

"int an idea, mithterand noboody elthe that  knowth of  Liv'th on
hith wit'th,  should thay, if you athk me.  rong 'un"

"or where he lives"

"o, mithter  ll  knowth ith that he come'th to ivian'thnow and
then."

"nd you saw him tonight"

" did, mithtertonight ath ever wath"

"hat time was that"

"bout eight o'clock, mithternear ath  can fix it."

"ell, what happened"

"Thith, mithter.  e came in about eight, ath  thay.   wath there,
doing a bit o' bithneth with another cuthmur.  atheverie, he didn't
thtop.  e wathn't in the plathe three minuteth, and while he wath in
he theemedto meto be a bit fidgetythuthpithious, like.  Looked
round and aboutcautiouth.  Then he wentand  followed him.
ccording to inthructionth from Mapperley there."

"here did he go"

"ell, mithter, 'll give you the particularthin full when  theth
out on a ob o' that thort  do it proper.  e turned out o'
andlethtick athage into the Lane, and he had a drink at a bar there.
Then he went to Trafalgar uare Tube.   wath clothe behind him when
he booked"

" moment.  oes he know you"

"May utht know me by thite, mithter, but not enough to exthite any
thuthpithion in hith mind if he thaw me there behind him.   never had
no truck with himnever thpoke to him."

"ell, go on.  here did he book to"

"arwick venue, mithter.  Tho did of courth.  hen we got there, 
followed him outat a thafe dithtance.  e turned down to the anal,
crothed the bridge, and went down to Thant Mary'th Manthion'th.  nd
there he went in."

etherwick glanced at Mapperley.  Mapperley permitted himself to wink
at his employerrespectfully, but knowingly.

"ent into t. Mary's Mansions, eh" said etherwick.  "alked straight
in"

"traight in, mithterfront entranth.   thee him, from acroth the
road, talking to the man in liveryporter or whatever he hith.  
could thee through the glath doorth.  Then  thee both of 'em go up in
the lift.  Tho  waited about a bit, utht to thee if he'd come out.
e did."

"oon" asked etherwick.

"e wath inthide about ten minuteth.  Then he came out.  lone.  Thith
time he went in t'other direction.   followed him acroth addington
reen to dgware oad Tube, and therewell, to tell you the truth,
mithter, there  lotht him  There wath a lot o' people about, and 
made thure he'd be going thouth.  ut he mutht ha' gone wetht.  nyway,
 lotht him altogether."

"ell think you saw enough to be of help," said etherwick.
"owust keep this to yourself, oldmark."  e motioned Mapperley
into another room, gave him money for his assistant, and waited until
the ew had gone, shown out by the clerk.  "leven o'clock" he
remarked, glancing at his watch as Mapperley came back.  "Mapperley
we're going outto t. Mary's Mansions.  nd after we've been there,
and made a call, you'd better come back here with me and take a
shakedown for the night shall want you in the morning, unless 'm
mistaken."

t was one of Mapperley's chief virtues that he was always ready to go
anywhere and do anything, and he at once accompanied etherwick to the
top of Middle Temple Lane, found a taxicab within five minutes, and
proposed himself to sit up and shakedown that night and the next, if
necessary.

"cent's getting hot,  think, sir," he remarked as they drove off,
after bidding the driver carry them to addington reen.  "Things seem
to be coming to a head."

"Yesbut  don't think you know everything," answered etherwick.  e
proceeded to give the clerk an epitomised account of the day's doings
as they had related to himself, concluding with Matherfield's theory as
expressed after leaving the reen rcher.  "You're a smart chap,
Mapperley," he added.  "hat do you think"

" see Matherfield's point," answered Mapperley.  " can follow his
line.  e thinks like this annaford, when he came to London, wanted
to get rid, advantageously, of that formula of his about a new ink.  e
got into touch with mbrose, whom, of course, he'd known before at
ellithwaite.  mbrose introduced him to some men who deal or dabble in
chemicals, of whom one, no doubt, is aseverie, and who seem to have a
laboratory or something of that sort somewhere in the estminster
district.  n the night of the murder mbrose met annaford, by
appointment, at ictoria, and took him there.  robably, annaford left
the sealed packetopened by that timewith these fellows.  robably,
too, while there he told themokingly, very likelywhat he'd
discovered, from the picture in the papers, about the identity of Mrs.
hittingham and Madame Listorelle.  nd now comes inranett"

etherwick gave an exclamation that denoted two or three
thingssurprise, for one.

"h" he said.  "ranett  To be sure  'd forgotten ranett"

" hadn't," remarked Mapperley with a cynical laugh.  "ranettand his
murderis an essential factor.  hat  think is this e know that
annaford met mbrose at ictoria tation that allimportant evening.
mbrose, without doubt, took him to the place  hinted at ust nowthe
exact location of which is a mystery.   think annaford stopped there
until late in the evening.  ut also think he went back again
ithranett"

"h" exclaimed etherwick.  " see"

"e know," continued Mapperley, "that ranett went that evening to see
the chemist who gave information about him we know, too, that he and
the chemist went and had a drink together, and parted at about closing
time, ranett then, according to the chemist, going towards ictoria
treet.  ow  think that ranett then met annafordaccidentally.
They'd known each other in ellithwaite.  They talkedranett told
annaford he was down on his luck.  annaford, evidently, was a
kindhearted man, and  think he did two things out of kindness for
ranett.  e gave him that fivepound note"

"That was got at ivian's" interrupted etherwick uickly.

"To be sure" assented Mapperley.  "ut we know that annaford had been
at ivian'swith aseverieundoubtedly.  Taken there by aseverie,
which makes me certain that for two or three days before his death he'd
been in touch with both aseverie and mbrose.  annaford got that
fiver in change at ivian's.  nd he gave it to ranett, on hearing his
story.  ut he did something elsesomething that was far more
importantthat is far more importantto us"

"hat" asked etherwick.

"e turned back to the place he'd ust left, and took ranett with
him" answered Mapperley with confidence.  "e knew ranett was a
trained and ualified chemist he thought he could get him a ob with
these men who, presumably, were going to take up his own invention.  t
would be little more than halfpast ten then.  here else than at this
place are annaford and ranett likely to have been between that time
and the time at which they got into your carriage at t. ames's ark
f course they were therewith mbrose and aseverie."

"s you put ithighly probable," said etherwick.  "Two and a half
hoursdoing what"

"h, now we come to the real thing" exclaimed Mapperley.  "My own
belief is that annaford was fatally poisoned when he left those two
men the first time  They'd two obects in poisoning himor, to put it
another way, he'd entrusted them with two secretsone about Madame
Listorelle the other about his invention.  They wanted to keep both to
themselves and to profit by both.  The invention, no doubt, has
considerable valueannaford believed it had, anyway.  They thought
they could blackmail Madame and her sister, Lady iversreade.  o,
before annaford left them the first time, they poisoned himcleverly,
subtly, devilishlyknowing that so many hours would elapse before the
poison worked, and that by that time he'd be safe in bed at his hotel
and would die in his sleep.  uthe went back to them again, and took
another man with him  othat man had to die, too"

etherwick thought awhile in silence.

"ll very good theory, Mapperley," he said at last.  "utit may be
nothing but theory.  hy did ranett run off at haring ross"

"ecause ranett knew that mbrose lived in ohn treet, close by,"
replied Mapperley with promptitude.  "e may have known it before he
may not have known it until that evening.  uthe knew it  Most
likely he thought that mbrose had returned home from the place in
estminster mbrose may have left there before annaford and ranett
did.  nyway, we may be reasonably certain that when ranett left you
with the dying or dead man, he ran off to mbrose's flata few minutes
away."

"hy didn't he come back" demanded etherwick.  "'m only wanting to
get at probabilities."

"'ve thought of that, too," replied Mapperley.  " think he found
mbrose out.  ut by that time he'd had time to reflect.  e knew
something was wrong.  e knew that if he went back, he'd find the
police there, and would be uestioned.  e might be suspected.  nd
sohe went home, with the bottle in which mbrose had given him a drop
of whisky for himself.  nddied in his sleep, as they thought
annaford would."

"hy should mbrose have that bottle down at estminster" asked
etherwick.

"hy shouldn't he" retorted Mapperley.  " man who's taking a tonic
takes it at least three times a dayregularly.  e'd have his bottle
with him.  robably there are several similar empty bottles there at
that place."

"here is that place" exclaimed etherwick.  "here"

"ot to be found," said Mapperley, as the cab came to a stand.
"uthere's this"

etherwick led his companion across addington reen and to the house
from which he and Matherfield had watched the flats opposite.  Late as
it was, the lodginghouse keeper was up, and lent a willing ear to
etherwick's reuest that he should go with him to his friend the
caretaker of the Mansions.  That functionary was at supper.  e
continued to sup as etherwick, morally supported by the lodginghouse
man, explained matters to him, but at last he allowed his cheek to
bulge with unswallowed food and turned a surprised and knowing eye on
his principal visitor.

"lamed if  didn't wonder whether it was all .. with that chap" he
exclaimed, banging the table with the haft of his knife.  "or all he
was uite the gentleman,  somehow suspicioned him  nd yet, he'd a
straight tale to tell come here on Madame's behalf, to get something
for her out of her rooms, had her keys, and give me a note from her
saying as how  was to allow the bearer to go up to her flat  hat
more could  expectand what could  dounder the circs   asks yer"

"h, he had a note, had he" inuired etherwick.  "n Madame's
writing"

The caretaker laid down his knife, and thrusting his hand in his
breastpocket, drew forth an envelope and silently handed it over.  t
was an auretinted envelope, of a very good uality of paper, such as
is only sold in highclass stationery shops, and the sheet inside
matched it in tint and uality.  ut etherwick at once noticed
something about that sheet so, too, did Mapperley, peering at it from
behind his elbow.  bout an inch and a half had been rather roughly cut
off at the top obviously some address had been engraved, or embossed,
or printed on the missing portion.  s for what was written on the
sheet, it was littlea simple order that the caretaker should allow
bearer to go into Madame Listorelle's flat.

"You recognised that as Madame's handwriting" suggested etherwick.

"h, that's her fist, right enough, that is" replied the caretaker.
" knew it at once.  nd no wonder   ain't no scholard, not mebut
 knows enough to know that it 'ud pule one o' them here forgers as
ye reads about to imitate that there sort o' writingmore like as if
it had been done with a wooden skewer than a hristian pen  h, that's
hers."

etherwick handed the letter and envelope to Mapperley, who was holding
out a hand.

"ell," he said.  " wish ye'd ust let me have a look into Madame's
flat.  There's something seriously wrong, and"

"h, you can do that'long as 'm with you," said the caretaker
readily.  e rose and led the way to the left, and presently ushered
them into a smart flat and turned on the electric light.  "on't see
nothing wrong here," he observed.  "The chap wasn't here ten minutes,
and he carried nothing heavy away, whatever he had in his pockets."

etherwick and Mapperley looked round.  verything seemed correct and
in orderthe surroundings were those of a refined and artistic woman,
obviously one who loved order and system.  ut on a desk that stood in
the centre of the sittingroom a drawer had been pulled open, and in
front of it lay scattered a few sheets of Madame Listorelle's private
notepaper, with her engraved address and crest.  ear by lay some
envelopes, similarly marked.  nd with a sudden idea in his mind,
etherwick picked up a sheet or two of the paper and a couple of
envelopes and put them in his pocket.

 few minutes later, once more in the cab which they had kept waiting,
and on the way to ill treet, whither etherwick had bidden the driver
go next, Mapperley turned to his employer with a sly laugh, and held up
something in the light of a street lamp by which they were passing.

"hat's that" asked etherwick.

"The order written by Madame Listorelle," answered Mapperley,
chuckling.  "The caretaker didn't notice that  carried it off,
envelope and all, under his very eyes  ut  didand here it is"

"hat do you want to do with it" demanded etherwick.  "hat's your
notion"

ut Mapperley only chuckled again and without giving any answer
restored the auretinted envelope and its contents to his pocket.




T 

T LYTL LT

Lord Morradale, who kept up honest, countrysuire habits even in
London, had gone to bed when etherwick and Mapperley arrived at his
house, but he lost little time in making an appearance, in pyamas and
dressinggown, and listened eagerly to etherwick's account of the
recent transactions.

"orce" he muttered, nodding his head at each point of the story.
"orce got it out of her by force.  That is, if the order's genuine."

Mapperley produced the sheet of paper, which he had filched under the
caretaker's eyes, and silently handed it over.

"h, that's Madame Listorelle's handwriting" exclaimed Lord Morradale.
"ers, without doubt.  ifficult to imitate, of course.  h, yeshers
ell, that proves what 've ust said, Mr. etherwickforce  he's in
their powerwith the young lady, MissMisseatherstone, to be
sureand they've made her write that.  ext, they'll make her write an
order on the mperial afe eposit.  e must be beforehand with them
there.  arlyearly as possible in the morning.  Meet me at
Matherfield's think he's pretty keen.  less me what a pack of
villains  ow  wonder where, in all London, these unfortunate ladies
are"

"That's precisely what all this ought to help us to find out," remarked
etherwick.  "'m not so much concerned about the valuables these men
are after as about the safety of"

Lord Morradale gave him a uick, understanding glance.

"f Miss eatherstone, eh" he said.  " see see  nd 'm
concerned, too, about Madame Listorelle.  ell, this, as you say, ought
to help.  ut look herewe must be cautiousvery cautious  e
mustn't let Matherfieldyou know what the police arewe mustn't let
him be too precipitate.  robablyif a man comes to the safe place,
he'll go away from it to where these scoundrels are.  e must
followfollow"

" agree," said etherwick.

"ine o'clock, then, at Matherfield's," concluded his lordship.  "nd
may we have a strong scent, a rousing one, and a successful kill"

ith this bit of sporting phraseology in their ears, etherwick and
Mapperley returned to the Middle Temple and retired for the rest of the
night, one to bed, the other to a shakedown on the sittingroom sofa.
ut when etherwick's alarum clock awoke him at seventhirty and he put
his head into the next room to rouse the clerk, he found that Mapperley
had vanished.  The cushions, rugs, and blankets with which he had made
himself comfortable for the night were all neatly folded and
arrangedon the topmost was pinned a sheet of briefpaper, with a
message scrawled in blue pencil.


You won't want me this morning off on an important notion of my own.
Look out for message from me about noon.

M.


Muttering to himself that he hadn't the least idea as to what his clerk
was about, etherwick made a hurried toilet, and an eually hurried
breakfast, and hastened away to meet Matherfield and Lord Morradale.
e found these two together, and with them a uiet, solemnfaced
individual, clad in unusually sombre garments, whom Matherfield
introduced as etectiveergeant uigman.  Matherfield went straight to
business.

"is lordship's ust told me of your adventure last night, Mr.
etherwick," he said, "and 'm beginning to get a sort of forecast of
what's likely to happen.  t was, of course, aseverie who went to
madame's flat last nightthat's settled.  ut what do you suppose he
went for"

"an't say that 've worked that out," answered etherwick, with a
glance at the others.  "ut  imagine that he went there to get, say,
certain keyshaving forced Madame Listorelle to tell him where they
were.  The keys of her safe at the eposit place,  should think."

"o" replied Matherfield, shaking his head knowingly, and with a sly
smile at uigman.  "o, not that.  'll tell you what he went fora
very simple thing.  e went to get some of Madame's private notepaper
e knew well enough that if he was to take an order on that afe
eposit to allow the bearer access to Madame's safe it would have to be
what the rench,  believe, call en rgleeh  ritten on her own
notepaper in her own handwriting, and so on.  ee"

" think you're right, and  think he got it," said etherwick.  "
drawer in her desk containing boxes of stationery had been pulled out,
and some of its contents lay about the desk.  s a matter of fact,
though  scarcely know why  did it,  put some paper and some
envelopes in my pockethere they are   had a faint idea that they
might be usefulsomehow."

"ell, that's the notion, depend on it," asserted Matherfield, glancing
at the paper which etherwick produced.  "'ve no doubt that somebody,
representing Madame Listorelle, and bearing an authoriation from her,
written on her notepaper in her own writing, will present himself at
the mperial afe eposit this morning.  utit won't be aseverie
nd it won't be mbrose"

" stranger, eh" suggested etherwick.

"e shall see.  ow," continued Matherfield, glancing at the clock,
"we'll be off to the scene of operations.  This mperial afe eposit
is in ingswayolborn endand very fortunately situated for our ob,
being close to the Tube station there'll be lots of people about
there, and we shan't attract attention.  nd this is the way of ithis
lordship and myself will go into the afe eposit, see the people in
charge, explain matters, and get them to tell us at once if and when
the expected ambassador arrives.  e shall let him"

"r her," interrupted uigman solemnly.

"ust so, my ladit might be a she," assented Matherfield.  "uite
likely  e shall let him or her get what is wanted from the safe and
go away, closely followed by all four of us.  hile Lord Morradale and
 are inside, you and uigman, Mr. etherwick, will be outside,
talking, casually.  hen we come outand you'll both keep a sharp
watch on the entrance hall'll give you the office as to the
particular person we're following, and wherever that person goes, you
two will go.  ut don't come near uswe'll keep one side of the
street, you the other.  f the person takes to a cab or a buswell,
we'll have to do the same.  ut 've reasons for thinking he or she
will stick to his feet"

"ow do we goall together" asked etherwick.  "ecauseit's a mere
ideahow do you know, Matherfield, that these peoplethere would
appear to be more than one concernedaren't keeping an eye on you"

"'ve thought of that," answered Matherfield.  "owe're all going
separately.  t's now ninefifteen.  That mperial afe eposit doesn't
open its doors till tennobody can get in there until that time,
anyway.  e all four go out of this office on our own hook.  ach takes
his own method of getting to the top of ingsway.  s soon as  get
there,  go straight in and ask for the manager.  s soon as Lord
Morradale gets there, he follows suithe and  forgather in the
manager's room.  s for you two, go how you likefly, if it suits
youor wander round the side streets.  utyou meet right opposite
the afe eposit entrance at precisely ten o'clock, and under pretence
of casual meeting and conversation keep your eyes on it, noticing
everybody who goes in and comes out.  That clear  Then we all clear
outone by one."

utside, and left to his own devices, etherwick walked a little way
and then hailed a taxicab.  e gave his driver a confidential smile.

"You can ust help me to employ forty minutes," he said, as he got in.
"rive roundanywhere you likeup and downas long as you put me
down at the corner of the olborn estaurant at precisely two minutes
to ten.  ot that"

The driver comprehended, and began a leisurely ourney round certain
principal streets and thoroughfares.  Two minutes before ten he pulled
up at the olborningsway corner and gave his fare a grin.

"one it to the second, sir," he announced, nodding at an adacent
clock.

"ood man" said etherwick, handing out something over the registered
fare.  Then an idea struck him.  "Look here" he continued
confidentially.  "and another manmay have to follow somebody from
here, presently.  ust drive down the street here, keep your flag down,
and waitif  want you,  shall be close at hand."

The driver showed his understanding by a nod and a wink and moved a
little distance off to the kerbstone.  etherwick walked slowly down
the west side of ingsway.  nd precisely as the clock struck ten he
saw Lord Morradale come from one direction and enter the
formidablelooking and ust opened door of the afe eposit, and
Matherfield appear from the other looking round again he was aware of
the solemnfaced uigman who sauntered round the corner of arker
treet and came towards him.  etherwick went on to meet him.

"There you are" he said, doing a little acting in case any inimical
eyes were on him.  "To the minute  e'd better appear to be doing a
bit of talk, eh  The others have ust gone in."

" saw 'em, sir," replied uigman, coming to a halt on the kerb, and
affecting an interest in anything rather than on what he was really
working.  "h  ut the uestion iswhen will they come out  Might be
in a few minutesso to speak.  Mightn't be for hoursas it were"

"You seem to be a melancholy chap," observed etherwick.

"Melancholy ob" muttered uigman.  "atching isn't my line.  ut
Matherfieldhe particularly wanted me to be in at this."

"hy" asked etherwick.

"eculiar knowledge of solicitors and their clerks in this part o'
London," replied uigman.  "My line.  Matherfield, he's an idea that
the order to open this safe'll be presented by a solicitor."

"ood Lordhas he" exclaimed etherwick.  " wonder  ut"

"ig help to these chaps, don't you see, if they can make a solicitor
do the cat'spaw work," suggested uigman.  "ho'd suspect a solicitor
of the igh ourt  nd as  know pretty nearly all of 'emthere's one
 know now coming up t'other side of the street," he continued
suddenly.  "That tallish, thin, palefaced chapsee him  Look at him
without seeming to look.  ow  wonder if he's the party we want"

etherwick looked in the direction indicated.  e saw a youngish,
spectacled man in a silk hat, morning coat, and the corresponding
additions of professional attire, who was walking rapidly along from
outh to north.  e was a very mild, gentlelooking person, not at all
the sort to be concerned in dark plots and mysterious aims, and
etherwick said so.

"ye, well, you never know" remarked uigman lugubriously.  "ut, as 
say,  know him.  Mr. arrowellMr. ctavius arrowellsolicitor, of
t. Martin's Lane, that is.  een in practice for himself about four
years or so.  ice young felleruiet.  nd he is going in
theresee"

etherwick saw.  There were several people, men and women, entering the
afe eposit ust then, but Mr. arrowell's silk hat and sloping
shoulders made him easily identifiable.

" dessay it's him" observed uigman, with a sigh.  "ust the sort to
be took in, he is  nnocent, unsuspecting sort o' gentleman.
oweverit mayn't be.  eal o' people use these afe eposits
nowadays."

Mr. arrowell disappeared.  The two watchers waited.  ive, ten,
fifteen, twenty minutes went by then Mr. arrowell came out.  e came
out ust as any man would come out after transacting his business,
uietly.  obody followed him nobody seemed to be watching himfrom
the afe eposit.  ut etherwick noticed at once that whereas he had
entered carrying nothing but an umbrella, he now carried a small,
suare, leathercovered box.  ith this in his left hand he crossed the
roadway, and advanced straight towards etherwick and uigman.

"o need to move, sir," whispered the detective.  "Take no noticespot
him, though."

Mr. arrowell, seen at close uarters, looked to be a somewhat
absentminded gentleman.  ut, chancing to look up as he stepped on the
pavement, his eyes encountered uigman, who touched his hat.

"Morning, Mr. arrowell," said the detective.  "ice morning, sir."

"Morning, uigman," responded Mr. arrowell.  " very nice morning"

e nodded smilingly and went on his way, and round the corner into
arker treet.  uigman glanced at etherwick and shook his head.

"ot him" he said.  "Matherfield's not following.  nd, as  said, we
may have to waithours"

ut at the end of another ten minutes Matherfield and Lord Morradale
came together out of the entrance hall opposite.  n official, smiling
and talking, accompanied them to the threshold when they left him they
came straight across the road.  nd it was obvious to etherwick that
each was in a state of surprisepossibly, of perplexity.  Matherfield
hailed them as soon as he was within speaking distance.

"ere's a ueer business" he said.  "id you see a
professionallooking chap come away ust now who carried a small
leather box"

"e saw Mr. arrowell, solicitor, t. Martin's Lane," answered uigman.
" know him.  one down arker treet."

"t was arrowell," assented Matherfield.  " know him, too.  ell," he
turned to etherwick, "it's a ueer business.  They knew arrowell
across therehe's been to Madame Listorelle's safe for her before.  e
came there ust now, with the usual authorisation, on her notepaper,
went to the safe, got that small box, and went.  arrowella
highlyrespectable legal practitioner"

"hy didn't you stop him and ask him uestions" inuired etherwick.

Matherfield exchanged a glance with Lord Morradale.

"ot there" he said.  "twell, it looks as if Madame really had sent
him  er business."

"f course she'd sent him" exclaimed etherwick.  "ent him under
compulsion  The whole thing's a clever plant  These fellows probably
know that she's employed arrowell now and then, and they forced her to
write a letter to him, authorising him to come here again, and
enclosing an order on the afe eposit people  on't you see"

"y ad, there's something in that, Matherfield" said Lord Morradale.
"idn't strike me, though  'on my honour,  really thought he had
come direct from her.  ouldn't think why, exactly, but then, as
Matherfield says, a highlyrespectable solicitoreh"

"e'll soon settle it" exclaimed Matherfield suddenly.  "e'll go to
arrowell's office.  etter discuss it there than have tackled him
here.  nyway, he'll have the suare box.  uigman, call a taxi"

"There's a man here waiting for me," said etherwick.  e signalled to
his former driver who uickly came alongside.  "or anything we know,"
he continued, as all four took their seats, and were driven off,
"arrowell may have gone straight away somewhere to hand that box over
e ought to have followed."

" don't think so," replied Matherfield.  "The whole thing's ueer, and
not at all what  expected.  Lord Morradale says that he never heard of
madame employing arrowell, and yet the afe people say he's been here
two or three times on her business.  ut we'll soon have it out of him."




T 

T LLY  LTTL MT TT

arrowell's office proved to be up two flights of stairs in t.
Martin's Lane.  They were dark and dingy stairs, and none of the four
men clambering up them noticed that an officeboy, rushing
unceremoniously downward carried a small parcel with which he fled out
of the door and away down the street.  They were, indeed, thinking of
arrowelland within five minutes they were all in his private room.
or another five minutes Matherfield was explaining mattersexplaining
to an obviously startled and much astonished listener.

"That's how it stands," concluded Matherfield.  "You've evidently got
the explanation, Mr. arrowell.  ow"

"ut you surprise me" broke in the solicitor.  "'ve acted for Madame
Listorelle in two or three matters've got things from her safe for
her before, once or twice.  nd  saw nothing unusual in the letter she
sent me this morning.  ere it is  You can see it.  er usual
notepapercertainly her handwritingnobody,  think, could imitate
that successfully.  You see what she says was to give the enclosed
authorisation to the afe people, take out a small, suare,
brownleathercovered box from the safe, pack it up, and send it off to
Mr. . asing, ost ffice, outhampton, at once, by express delivery.
othing unusual in all that,  think.  f course,  carried out her
wishes.  ut look at the letter."

ll four men were looking at the letter.  t was as arrowell
described, and whether it had been written under duress or not, the
writing was bold and firm.  ut Matherfield seied on the envelope, and
after a glance at it, pointed to the postmark.

"ee that" he exclaimed.  "osted in the .. district late last
night.  f madame had been at home in addington the postmark would
have been different.  ellbut the suare box, Mr. arrowell  You've
got it, of course  o you know that that box probably contains ewels
worth"

"The box" eaculated arrowell.  "ot it  f course not  t's gone
The boy went off to the post office with itoh, ust before you came."

"ad" muttered Lord Morradale.  "ellthe post office, at once,
Matherfield"

ut Matherfield suddenly laughed, throwing up both hands as if with a
sudden inspiration.

"o, my lord, no" he said.  "o  The box is safe enough in the post.
t's off to Mr. . asing, ost ffice, outhampton.  nd when Mr.
asing calls to collect ithe'll find me"

There was triumphant conviction in Matherfield's tone there was the
impulse to immediate action in the way in which he pulled out a railway
guide from his pocket, and rapidly turned its pages.  ut etherwick
and Lord Morradale looked at each other.  nd each saw that the other
was dubious.

"Yes," said Lord Morradale slowly.  "mno doubt, Matherfield.  ut 
say, you knowthose ewels are worth no end  afe enough, perhaps, in
the hands of the postal authorities, now they are there, butthere's
many a slip, you know, and"

"You might take the postal authorities into your confidence," suggested
etherwick.  "These people are up to all sorts of wily tricks"

Matherfield laughed uietly.  t was the laugh of a man who knows his
own business thoroughly, and is a little impatient of outside criticism.

" know what 'm doing, gentlemen," he answered.  "Leave it to me as to
what  do with the post office people.  've as good as got the
handcuffs on aseverie or on mbroseperhaps on both  This is how 
figure the thing," he went on, with a final glance at the timetable.
"These two men have got Madame Listorelle and the young ladysecretary
in their power, safe somewhere in London.  They forced madame, last
night, to write that letter to Mr. arrowell herewe know what they
made her write.  Mr. arrowell got the small box containing the ewels,
and he's sent it off, already, by express delivery, to outhampton.  t
will be there early this evening, and one or other of the men will be
there to meet it.  f aseverie calls for it, mbrose will be round the
corner.  f mbrose calls for it, aseverie will be close at hand.
robably they're already in outhamptonthey'd go this morning, to be
on the spot.  s soon as the box is in their hands they'll be
offprobably to the ontinent, by outhampton and avre.  They won't
try the tlanticthe five days' voyage would be too risky.  They'll
make for rance.  ut they won't get to rancethey'll find themselves
in the lockup at outhampton before bedtime  You see if that doesn't
come off, gentlemen, as sure as my name's what it is.  ow, uigman,
you come with me.  e've ust nice time to catch the onethirty, and to
get in touch with the outhampton police, and lay our plans and make
our arrangements.  ome time tonight, gentlemen, you'll hear from me"

Then Matherfield hurried uigman away, and the three men left behind
looked at each other.  Mr. arrowell was obviously much concerned, and
his hands, thin and nervous, trembled as he began to arrange the papers
on his desk.

"This is a most distressing business, gentlemen," he said.  "t is very
painful to me to think that  have been made an instrument in a crime
of this sort, however innocent a one  ut how could  tell that this
letter was forced out of Madame Listorelle  n the face of it"

"h, there's no blame attaching to you, Mr. arrowell" interrupted
Lord Morradale.  "n the face of it, the letter's genuine enough.  ut
 wanted to ask you a uestion ow much do you know of Madame
Listorelle   mean, how often has she employed you"

"Two or three times only," replied arrowell.  "he came to me first
about an agreement which  had had to send her on behalf of another
client.  he seemed very friendly, and was kind enough to say that next
time she had any legal business she would remember me as she hadn't any
regular solicitor of her own.   think," he added with a deprecating
smile, "she probably saw that  was beginning, and hadn't much to do."

" see," said Lord Morradale, looking round at the somewhat humble
appointments of the office.  "nd you've been to that afe eposit
place on her behalfhow often"

"Twice.  n each occasion Madame Listorelle wrote her instructions from
abroad.  nce she was in aris.  The other time she was at ice.  The
instructions were similar on both occasions  was to go to the afe
eposit, get a certain parcel or article and post it to an address
given.  The first time  sent a small parcel to msterdam have the
exact address and name the second, to ew York.  o that, of course,
when  got Madame's letter this morning,  saw nothing unusual in it."

"ust so" agreed Lord Morradale.  "You wouldn't.  ell,  hope
Matherfield will clap the irons on the men who forced her to write it
h, etherwick"

"ith all my heart" responded etherwick "ut , too, want to ask Mr.
arrowell a uestion.  ow long," he continued, "have you been here, in
t. Martin's Lane"

"h, four or five years," replied arrowell.

"Then you know this district pretty well, of course.  ave you ever
come across a man whom 'll try to describe to you"  e went on to
give an accurate, if concise, description of aseverie.  "That man," he
concluded, "is sometimes seen around here."

arrowell nodded.

" know him" he said.  "n fact, he's been in this very roomto see
me.  ut  don't know his name, nor anything much about him.  e was
brought here by another man and he only stayed a few minutes."

"ow much do you know about himhowever little" asked etherwick.

"This much.  You know that people who have invented things come to
solicitors for legal advice, and sometimes to get information as to how
they can best dispose of their inventions  ell, about nine months ago
a man came to me who claimed to have invented a dropbottlethat is, a
bottle from which you could only drop one drop of stuff at a time.  e
said such a thing was badly wanted, and that there ought to be a pile
of money in it.  e wanted to know how best to get it on the market.  
didn't know, but  mentioned the matter to one or two people, and a man
 knowor knew at that time, for he's since dead, unfortunatelysaid
that he knew a man who was a sort of commission agent for
inventionstook up a good idea, don't you see, and introduced itand
he promised to bring him to see me.  e brought him the man he brought
was, without doubt, the man you describe.  is name was not mentioned,
but  am sure he was that man.   don't know what your man is, but 
felt sure that the man  am talking about either was or had been a
medical man."

"h" exclaimed etherwick.  "hat made you think that"

"rom his conversationfrom the remarks he made about the bottle.  e
didn't take it up he said my client was too late and was wrongly
informed into the bargain there was such a thing, and a superior one,
already on the market.  e went away then, and, as  say,  never heard
his name, and 've never seen him since."

"That's the man we want" said etherwick.  "f Matherfield can only
lay hands on him  ut we shall know more by midnight."

utside, he turned to Lord Morradale with a shake of the head.

"e're no nearer to any knowledge of where the two women are" he
exclaimed.

"h,  don't know" responded Lord Morradale.  " think we are, you
know.  You see, if Matherfield nabs those chaps, or even one of them,
he or they will see that the game's up, and will give in and say where
their captives are.  dd business, etherwick, that people can be
kidnapped and imprisoned in broad daylight in London"

" don't think anything's impossible or oddin London," answered
etherwick dryly.  "f one had only the least idea as to which uarter
of the town that car was driven, one might be doing something"

"Lots of subsections in every uarter, and subsections again in each
of those," replied Lord Morradale with eual dryness.  "Take some time
to comb out this town  o   think we must trust to Matherfield.
othing else to trust to, in fact."

ut etherwick suddenly thought of Mapperley.  e began to wonder what
the clerk was after, what his notion had been.  Then he remembered
Mapperley's admonition to look out for a message about that time, and
excusing himself from Lord Morradale, he umped on a bus and went along
to the Temple.  There, in the letterbox, he found a telegram

  "Meet me ictoria three o'clock.  Mapperley."


etherwick set off for ictoria there and then.  ut it was only a
uarterpast two when he got there, and as he had had no lunch, he
turned into the restaurant.  There, when he was halfway through a
chop, Mapperley found him, and slipped into a chair close by before
etherwick noticed his presence.

"Thought  might find you in here, sir," said Mapperley.  They were
alone in a uiet corner, but the clerk lowered his voice to a whisper.
"ell," he continued, bending across the table, "'ve done a bit,
anyhow."

"n what way" asked etherwick.

Mapperley produced from his breast pocket some papers, and from amongst
them selected an envelopethe auretinted envelope which he had
picked up from the caretaker's supper table at t. Mary's Mansions.

"You recognise this" he said, with a sly smile.  "You know where  got
it.  This is the envelope which aseverie took to the caretaker, with
the order to enter Madame Listorelle's flat.  You knew that  carried
it off, from under the man's nose, last night.  ut you didn't know
why.   only laughed when you asked me."

"ell, why, then" inuired etherwick.

"This reason," replied Mapperley.  "e both noticed that the sheet of
paper on which the order had been written by Madame had been
shortenedthere was no doubt that a printed or embossed address had
been trimmed off, rather roughly, too.  e noticed that,  say, both of
us.  ut  don't think you noticed something far more importantfar,
far more importantfor our purposes."

"o," admitted etherwick.  " didn't.  hat"

"This," said Mapperley, turning back the broken flap of the envelope.
"You didn't notice that here, on the envelope, is the name and address
of the stationer who supplied this stuff  There you are. . alkin,
, roadway, estminster.  You never saw that, Mr. etherwick.  ut 
did"

etherwick began to comprehend.  e smiledgratefully.

"mart of you, Mapperley" he exclaimed.  " see  ndyou've been
there"

"'ve been there," answered Mapperley.  " saw a chance of tracking
these men down.   couldn't get hold of alkin till nearly noon, but 
got on like a house afire when  did get him.  You see," he went on,
"that paper is, to start with, of an unusual tint, in colour.
econdly, it's of very superior uality, though very thinintended
chiefly for foreign correspondence.  Thirdly, it's expensive.  ow, 
felt certain its use would be limited, and what  wanted to find out
from the stationer wasto whom he'd supplied it.  That was easy.  e
recognised the paper and envelope at once.  f the handwriting on the
paper, he knew nothing whateverMadame's writing, you knowthat he'd
never seen before.  ut he said at once that he'd only supplied that
particular make of paper and envelopes to three people, and for each
person he'd prepared a die, to emboss the addresses.  The embossing had
been done at his shop, and he showed me specimens of each.  ne was for
the owager Lady Markentree, , rosvenor ardens.  That was no use.
The second was for Miss helandry, , bury treet.  That was out of
count, too.  ut the third was what  wanted.  t was ust the address,
, Little mith treet, ...  s soon as  saw it,  knew 'd got on
the right track."

"o on" said etherwick.

"The stationer, alkin, didn't know the name of the man who ordered
this paper and gave this address," continued Mapperley.  "e knew him
well enough as a customer, though, and described him.  aseverie,
without a doubt  alkin says that aseverie, during the last few
months, bought various items of stationery from himnotebooks,
duplicating paper, office reuisites, and so on.  e never knew his
name, but as he always carried away his own purchases, and paid spot
cash for them, that didn't matter.  alkin supplied him with ten uires
of this paper and envelopes to match, a couple of months ago.
othere you are  nd there  wassure at last that aseverie's
mysterious hidingplace was , Little mith treet"

"oodgood" said etherwick.  "hat next"

"ell,  thought we could do with a bit of help," replied Mapperley,
smiling.  "o  left alkinbound to secrecy, of courseand
telephoned to ssy oldmark.  ssy is ust the sort of chap for games
of this sort  ssy cameand he and  took a stroll round.  o you
know Little mith treet"

"ot " answered etherwick.  "ever heard of it"

"h, well, but it is a street," said Mapperley.  "t lies between reat
mith treet and Tufton treet, back o' the hurch ousenot so far
from the bbey.  it slummy down those uarters, round aboutsort of
district that's seen decidedly better days.  till, there's good, solid
houses here and there is one of 'em.  rom outside, it looks the
sort of house you can't get intodark, silent, heavilycurtained
windowssort of place in which you could murder anybody on the uiet.
ery substantial front door, painted dark green, with an oldfashioned
brass knockerthat sort of house.  e took a good look at it."

"ee anything" asked etherwick.

"othing but what 've told youlifeless sort o' place," answered
Mapperley.  "owever, having once seen it,  wasn't going to leave it
unwatched, so  posted ssy there, in the window of a convenient
publichouse, and came away to telegraph to you.  nd there ssy
iseither in his pub, or loafing round.  nd now we ought to go and
hear if he's anything to report.  nd if he hasn'twhat then"

"ust so," said etherwick.  "That's itwhat then  ut before we do
anything at all, Mapperley, 'd better post you up as to what's
happened elsewhere this morning.  You see," he continued, when he had
finished his story, "if Matherfield's theory is correct, and aseverie
has already gone to outhampton to collect that parcel on its arrival,
and if mbrose has gone with him, we shan't find aseverie at this
address.  utwe might inuire if he's known there."

Mapperley reflected a while.  Then an idea seemed to suggest itself.

"ay your bill, sir, and let's get out to a ost ffice irectory
somewhere," he said.  "e'll get the name of the occupier of , Little
mith treet."

Ten minutes later they were looking down the long columns of names in a
directory Mapperley suddenly pointed to what they wanted.

"There we are" he said.  "Mrs. annah Mallettboardinghouse
proprietor."

"ome along" said etherwick.  "e'll see Mrs. Mallett, anyhow."

ut on arrival at Little mith treet, Mapperley looked round first,
for his friend, Mr. oldmark.  Mr. oldmark materialised
suddenlyapparently from nowhereand smiled.

"fternoon, mithter" he said politely to etherwick.  "Lovely weather,
ithn't it  in't theen nothing, Mapperley, old bean  in't been a
thoul in or out o' that houth, thinth you hopped it  Theemth to me
it'th locked up."

"e'll see about that," remarked etherwick.  "ome with me, Mapperley.
You stay here.  oldmark, and keep your eyes as open as before."

e advanced boldly, with the clerk at his heels, to the door of number
, and knocked loudly on the stout panel, supplementing this with a
ring at the bell.  This dual summons was twice repeatedwith no result.

"omebody coming" whispered Mapperley, suddenly.  "oltedinsideas
well as locked"

etherwick distinctly heard the sound of a stout bolt being withdrawn,
then of a key being turned.  The door was openedonly a little, but
sufficiently to show them the face and figure of an unusually big
woman, an maon in appearance, hard of eye and lip, who glared at them
suspiciously, and as soon as she saw that there were two of them,
narrowed the space through which she inspected her callers.  ut
etherwick got a hand on the door and a foot across the threshold.

"Mrs. Mallett" he inuired in a purposely loud voice.  "ust so  s
octor aseverie in"

oth men were watching the woman keenly, and they saw that she started
a little, involuntarily.  ut her head shook a ready negative.

"obody of that name here" she answered.

he would have shut the door, but for etherwick's foothe advanced it
further, giving Mrs. Mallett a keen, searching glance.

"erhaps you know r. aseverie by another name" he suggested.
"ois Mr. asing in"

ut the ready shake of the head came again, and the hard eyes grew
harder and more suspicious.

"obody of that name here, either" she said.  "on't know anybody of
those names."

" think you do," persisted etherwick sternly.  e turned to
Mapperley, purposely.  "e shall have to get the police"

"Look out, sir" exclaimed Mapperley, snatching at etherwick's arm.
"Your fingers"

The woman suddenly banged the door to, narrowly missing etherwick's
hand, which he had closed on the edge a second later they heard the
bolt slipped and the key turned.  nd etherwick, as with a swift
illumination, comprehended things, and turned sharply on his clerk.

"Mapperley" he exclaimed.  "ure as fate  Those ladies are in there
Trapped"

"houldn't wonder, sir," agreed Mapperley.  "nd as you saythe
police"

"ome back to oldmark," said etherwick.

oing lower down the street and retreating into the shelter of a
doorway, the three men held a rapid consultation, suddenly interrupted
by an exclamation from the ew, who still kept his eyes on the house

"Th'elp me if the woman ain't leavin' that houth" he said.  "Thee
thethee ith  Lockin' the door behind her, too  oin' up the
thtreet"

etherwick looked and saw, and pushed oldmark out of the doorway.

"ollow" he said.  "nd for od's sake, don't miss her"




T 

T   T Y

The ew silently and promptly set out in the wake of the hurrying
woman presently she and her pursuer disappeared round a corner.

"That's the result of our call, Mapperley" said etherwick.  "he's
gone somewhereto tell somebody"

"Likely" assented Mapperley.  "ut wherever she's gone, ssy
oldmark'll spot her.  e's the eyes of a lynx."

"e let aseverie slip him, the other night, though," remarked
etherwick.

"ell, there was some excuse for that," said Mapperley, "to begin with,
he was only instructed to find out where aseverie went, and to end
with he had found out  e'll not let this woman slip him.  he's good
to followplenty of her."

" wish we knew what she'd left in that house," said etherwick.
"e'll have to find out, somehow"

"That's a police ob," replied Mapperley.  "an't walk into people's
houses without a warrant.  nd you say Matherfield's on the other
track  owever,  should say that this woman's gone off now to find
somebody who's principally concernedshe looked afraid, in my opinion,
when she saw me."

"he's in it, somehow," muttered etherwick.

"That house looks mysterious enough for anything.  e'll keep a close
watch on it, anyway, until oldmark comes back, however long that may
be."

ut the ew was back within twenty minutes.  o was the woman.  he
came first, hurrying up the street uicker than when she had left it.
s far as the watchers could make out from their vantage point, twenty
yards away from her door, she looked flustered, distressed, upset.
fter her, on the opposite pavement, came Mr. ssy oldmark, his hands
in his pockets.

The woman reentered the house they heard the door bang.   moment
later the ew turned into the entry in which etherwick and Mapperley
stood, half hidden from the street.  e smiled, inscrutably.

"Thee her go back to her houth" he asked.  "ell,  followed.   thaw
where thee'th been, too."

"here, then" demanded etherwick, impatiently.

oldmark erked his head in the direction from whence he had come.

"ound that corner," he said, "you get into a regular thlum.  Little
thtreeth, alleyth, pathageth, and tho on.  n one of 'em, a narrow
plathe, where there'th a thort of openair market, there'th a good
thithed pieth of blank wall, with an ironfathen'd door in it.  ell,
the woman went in therelet herthelf in with a key that thee took from
her pocket.  th thoon ath thee'd gone in,  took a clother look.  The
door'th fathen'd with iron, or thteel, ath  thaidolly thtrong.
There ain't no name on it, and no keyhole that you can look through.
The wall'th a good nine or ten feet high, and it'th covered with broken
glath at the top.  ot a nithe plathe to get into, nohow"

"ell" inuired etherwick.  "he went in"

"ent in, ath  thay, mithter, and the door clothed on her.  fter 'd
taken a glimpth at the door  got a potht behind one of the thtalls in
the thtreet and watched.  he came out again in about ten
minitthlooked to me, too, ath if thee hadn't had a very plethant time
inthide.  pthet  nd thee thet off back here, fathter than vhat thee
came.  ow thee'th gone into her houth againath you no doubt thaw.
nd that'th all.  ut if  wath you, mithter," concluded ssy, "
should utht find out vhat there ith behind that door and the wall
it'th thet in thhould tho"

"That's a police ob," said Mapperley once more.  "f we'd only got
Matherfield with us, we could"  etherwick pausedthinking.  "Look
here, Mapperley," he continued, with a sudden inspiration.  " know
what we'll do  You get a taxicab, as uickly as possible.  rive to
the police station where  usually meet Matherfield.  There's another
man there whom  know, and who's pretty well up in this
businessetectiveergeant obmore.  sk for him.  Tell him what
we've discovered, and ask him to come back with you and to bring
another man if he thinks it necessary.  ow then, oldmark  Tell
Mapperley exactly where this place is."

The ew pointed along the street to its first corner.

"ound that corner," he said.  "irtht turning to the right then
firtht to the left then firtht to the rightthat'th the thpot.
Lot'th o' little thtallth in ita bithy, crowded plathe."

"idn't ye notice the name" demanded Mapperley, half scoldingly.

"To be thure  did" grinned oldmark.  "encove Thtreet.  ut it'th
better to dethcribe it than to name it.  nd don't you go tellin' no
tackthydriver to drive you in therecauth' there ain't room"

Mapperley gave no answer to this piece of advice he shot off in the
direction of ictoria treet, and etherwick turned to the ew.

"e'll go and have another look at this place, oldmark," he said.
"ut we'll go separatelyas long as we're in this street, anyway.  You
stroll off to that first corner, and 'll oin you."

e crossed the street when the ew had lounged away, and once more took
a narrow look at the house into which the big woman had vanished.  t
was as close barred and curtained as ever a veritable place of
mystery.  or a moment etherwick doubted whether he ought to leave it
unwatched.  ut the descriptions of the wall and door in encove treet
had excited his imagination, and he went on, turned the corner, and
reoined oldmark.  oldmark at once went in front, piloting him into a
mae of unusually dirty and crowded streets, and finally into one,
narrower than the rest, on each side of which were tentlike stalls
whereon all manner of cheap wares were being offered for sale by
raucousvoiced vendors.  e saw at once that this was one of those
openair markets of which there are many in the poorer neighbourhoods
of London, and wherein you can buy a sixpenny fryingpan as readily as
a paper of fried fish, and a gay neckerchief alongside a damaged orange.

Threading his way behind ssy, and between the thronged stalls and the
miserable shops that lined the pavement, etherwick presently came to
the piece of blank wall of which the ew had told him.  The houses and
shops round about were old and dilapidated, but the wall was either
modern or had been rebuilt and strengthened.  t stretched between two
low houses, one used as a grocer's, the other as a hardware shop.  n
length, it was some thirty feet in height, uite ten its coping, as
oldmark had said, was liberally embattled with broken glass.  The
door, set flush with the adoining masonry, was a solid affair, faced
with metal, newly painted, and the lock was evidently a patent one.  
significant fact struck etherwick at oncethere was no sign of a bell
and none of a knocker.

"You say the woman let herself in here" he asked, as he and ssy
paused.

"That'th it, mithter etherwicklet herthelf in," replied ssy.  "
thee her take the key from her pocket."

etherwick glanced at the top of the wall.

" wonder what's behind" he muttered.  "uilding of some sort, of
course."  e turned to a man whose stall stood ust in front of the
mysterious door, and who at that moment had no trade.  "o you know
anything about this place" he asked.  "o you know what's behind this
wall  hat building it is"

The stallkeeper eyed etherwick over, silently and carefully.
eciding that he was an innocent person and not a policeman in plain
clothes, he found his tongue.

" don't, guv'nor" he answered.  "'int a bloomin' notion   been
comin' here, or hereabouts, this three year or more, but  'aint never
seen behind that wall, nor in at that there doorway.  'elp me"

"ut  suppose you've seen people go in and come out of the door"
suggested etherwick.  "t must be used for something"

" reckon it is, guv'nor, but  don't call nobody to mind, though, to
be sure,  see a woman come out of it a while agobig, heavyawed
woman, she was.  ut ueer as it may seem,  don't call to mind ever
seeing anybody else.  You see, guv'nor,  comes here at about ten
o'clock of a morning, and  packs up and 'ops it at fiveif there's
folks comes in and out o' that spot, it must be early in a morning and
late at night, and so  shouldn't see 'em.  ut it's my belief this
here wall and door is back premises to somethingthe front o' the
place'll be on the other side."

"That's a good idea," said etherwick, with a glance at oldmark.
"Let's go round."

ut there was no going round.  lthough they tried various alleys and
passages and streets that ought to have been parallel to encove
treet, they failed to find any place that could be a frontage to the
mysterious wall and its closeset door.  ut the ew's alert faculties
asserted themselves.

"e can thee vhat'th behind that vail, mithter, eathy enough if we get
one o' them thopkeeperth oppothit to let uth go upthtairth to hith
firtht floor," he said.  "Look right acroth the thtreet there, thtallth
and all, into vhatever there ith.  Try that one," he went on, pointing
to a greengrocer's establishment which faced the closeset door.  "Tell
him we're doin' a bit o' land thurveyin'which ith thtrue"

etherwick made his reuestthe greengrocer's lady showed him and
oldmark upstairs into a bowwindowed parlour, one of those dismal
apartments which are only used on undays, for the purpose of adding
more gloom to a gloomy day.  he observed that there was a nice view
both ways of the street, but etherwick confined his inspection to the
front.  e saw across the wall easily enough, now.  There was little to
see.  The wall bounded a yard, bounded on its left and right sides by
the walls of the adoining houses, and at its further extremity by a
low, suat building of red brick, erected against the rear of a high,
windowless wall beyond.  rom its mere aspect, it was impossible to
tell what this suat, flatroofed structure was used for.  ts
doorclosedwas visible visible, too, were the windows on either
side.  ut it was easy to see that they were obscured, as to their
lower halves, by coats of dark paint.  There was no sign over the
building no outward indication of its purpose.  n the yard, however,
were crates, boxes, and carboys in wicker cases a curiouslyshaped
chimney, proecting from the roof above, suggested the presence of a
furnace or forge beneath.  nd etherwick, after another look, felt no
doubt that he was gaing at the place to which annaford had been
taken, and where he had been skilfully poisoned.

oldmark suddenly nudged his arm, and nodded at the crowded street
below.

"Mapperley" he whispered.  "nd two men with him"

etherwick, glancing in the direction indicated, saw obmore and
another man, both in plain clothes, making their way down the street,
between the stalls and the shops.  ith them, and in close
conversation, was a uniformed constable.  e turned to leave the room,
but oldmark again touched his elbow.

"efore we go, mithter," he said, "utht take another glanth at that
plathe oppothite, and it'ths thurroundin'th.   thee where we can get
in  'ye thee, mithter etherwick, the wall between that yard and the
next houththe righthand thide one'ith fairly low at the far end.
ow, if the man in that houth would let uth go through to hith
backyardvhat"

" see" agreed etherwick.  "e'll try it.  ut obmore firstcome
along."

e slipped some silver into the hand of the greengrocer's lady, and
went down to the street.   few brief explanations to the two
detectives supplemented the information already given them by
Mapperley, and then obmore nodded at the constable who stood by,
eagerly interested.

"e've been talking to him, Mr. etherwick," he said.  "e's sometimes
on day duty here, and sometimes he's on night.  e says he's often
wondered about this place, and it's a very ueer thing that though he's
known this district more than a year, he's never seen a soul go in or
out of that door, and hasn't the least notion of what business, if it
is a business, is carried on there"

"ever seen anything or anybody" corroborated the constable.  "t any
timeday or night.  hen  first came on this beat, maybe fifteen
months ago, that door had been newly set and painted, and the glass had
ust been stuck atop of the wall.  ut it's a fact've never seen
anybody go in or come out"

" propose to go in," said etherwick.  " think we've abundant cause,
knowing what we do.  t may be that the two missing ladies are there.
've been having a look into the yard, and we could get into it easily
by going through the grocer's shop there, on the right, and climbing
the wall from his back premises.  hat do you say, obmore"

"h,  think so" agreed obmore.  "ow we're on the ob, we'll carry
it through.  etter let me tackle the grocer, Mr. etherwick'll see
him first and then call you in."

The other waited while obmore entered the shop and spoke with its
owner.  They saw him engaged in conversation for several minutes then
he came to the door and beckoned the rest to approach.

"That's all right," he said in an aside to etherwick.  "e can go
through to his backyard, and he'll lend us a stepladder to get over
the wall.  ut he's told me a bithe knows the two men who have this
place in the next yard, and there's no doubt at all, from his
description of them, that one's mbrose and the other aseverie.  e
says they've had the place almost eighteen months, and he thinks they
use it as a laboratorychemicals, or something of that sort.  ut he
says they're rarely seensometimes he's never seen them for days and
even weeks together.  sually they're there of a nighthe's seen
lights in the place at all hours of the night.  ellcome on"

The posse of investigators filed through the dark little shop to a yard
at its rear, the grocer's apprentice going in front with a stepladder,
which he planted against the intervening wall at its lowest point.  ne
by one, the uniformed constable going first, the six men climbed and
dropped over.  ut for their own presence, the place seemed deserted
and lifeless.  s etherwick had observed from the greengrocer's
parlour the windows were obscured by thick coats of paint
nevertheless, two or three of the men approached and tried to find
places from which the paint had been scratched, in an effort to see
what lay inside.  ut the constable, bolder and more direct, went
straight to the entrance.

"oor's open" he exclaimed.  "ot even shut"  e pushed the door
wide, and went into the building, the rest crowding after him.
"ullo" he shouted.  "ullo"

o answer came to the summons.  The constable crossed the lobby in
which they were all standing, and opened an inner door.  nd etherwick
saw at once that the grocer's surmise as to the purpose to which the
place was put had been correctthis was a chemical laboratory, well
euipped, too, with modern apparatus.  ut there was not a sign of life
in it.

"obody here, apparently," murmured one of the men.  "lown"

obmore went forward to another door, and opening it, revealed a room
furnished as an office.  There was a rolltop desk in it, and papers
and documents lying there he and etherwick began to finger and
examine them.  nd etherwick suddenly saw something that made a link
between this mysterious place and the house he had called at earlier in
the afternoon.  There, before his eyes, lay some of the auretinted
notepaper which Mapperley had traced with the embossed address on it of
which the stationer had told.

"There's no doubt we've hit on the place at last, obmore," he said.
" wish we'd had Matherfield here.  ut"

efore he could say more, a sudden shout came from oldmark, who, while
the others were investigating the lower regions, had courageously, and
alone, gone up the low staircase to the upper rooms.

"Mithter" he called.  "Mithter etherwick come up herecome up, all
of you.  ere'th a man here, athittin' in a chairand th'elp me if 
don't believe he'th a thtiff 'undead"




T 



The rest of the searchers, hearing that startled cry from the ew, with
one accord made for the upper part of the building.  obmore and
etherwick reached him first he was standing at the halfopened door
of a room, into which he was staring with eager eyes.  They pushed by
him and entered.

etherwick took in the general aspect and contents of that room at a
glance.  t had been fitted uprecently, he thought, from certain
small evidencesas a bedsittingroom.   campbed stood in one
corner there was a washstand, a dressing table, a chest of drawers,
two or three pictures, a shelf of books, a small suare of carpet in
the centre of the floor, the outer edges of which had been roughly and
newly stained.  n the bed lay, open, a suitcase, already packed with
clothes and linen by it lay an overcoat, hat, gloves, umbrella it was
evident that the man to whom it belonged had completed his preparations
for a departure, and had nothing to do but to close and lock the
suitcase, put on his overcoat and hat, pick up the other things and go
away.

ut the man himself  There was a big, oldfashioned easy chair at the
side of the beda roomy, comfortable affair.   man lay, rather than
sat, in it, in an attitude which suggested that he had dropped there as
with a sudden weariness, laid his head back against the padded cushion,
andgone to sleep.  ut the men knew, all of them, as they crowded
into that room, that it was no sleep that they had broken in uponit
was death.  This, as the ew had been uick to see, was a dead
mandead

etherwick took him in as uickly as he had taken in his surroundings.
is head lay uietly against the padding of the chair, a little
inclined to his left shoulder the face was fully visible.  t wasto
etherwickthe face of a stranger in all his and Matherfield's
investigations it had not been described to them.  Yet he was certain
that he was looking on the man known to them by repute as mbrose.
isguised, of coursehe had shaved off the dark beard and moustache of
which they had heard, and he could see at once that the loss of them
had made a remarkable difference in his appearance.  ut nothing could
disguise his height and general build.  This, without doubt, was the
man Matherfield and he had hunted for, the man who had met annaford at
ictoria, who had disappeared from his flat in the delphithe man who
was associated with aseverie, and who

"ead as a doornail" muttered obmore, bending close to the still
figure.  "ndhe's been dead a good bit, toosome hours, anyway.
tiff  o ye know him, Mr. etherwick"

etherwick said what he thought.  obmore pointed to the things on the
bed.

"Looks as if he'd been taken with a seiure ust as he was about to set
off somewhere," he remarked.  "ell, if this is the r. mbrose we've
been seekingbut let's see if he's got anything on him to prove his
identity."

hile the rest of the men stood by watching, he put his hand into the
dead man's inside breast pockethe was wearing a smart, brandnew grey
tweed suit, etherwick, later on, remembered how its newness struck him
as being incongruously out of place, somehowand drew out a
pocketbook.  Touching etherwick's elbow and motioning him to follow
him, he went over to the window, leaving the others still staring
wonderingly at the dead man.

"This is a ueer business, Mr. etherwick," he whispered as they drew
apart.  "You think this is the r. mbrose we were after"

"ure of it" answered etherwick.  "e's shaved off his beard and
moustache, and that's no doubt made a big difference in his appearance,
but you may depend on it, this is the man  ut what's caused his
sudden death"

Then a keen, vivid recollection flashed up in him, and he turned
sharply, glancing at the rigid figure in the background.

"hat is it" asked obmore curiously.  "omething strikes you"

etherwick pointed to the dead man's attitude.

"That'sthat's ust how annaford looked when he died in the railway
carriage" he whispered.  "fter the first signsyou knowhe laid
back anddied.  ust like thatas if he'd dropped uietly asleep.
ancan it be that"

" know what you're thinking," muttered obmore.  "oisoned
ellwhat aboutehthe other man"

"aseverie" exclaimed etherwick.

"hy notto rid himself of an accomplice  utthis pocketbook,"
said obmore.  "Let's see what's in it.  oesn't seem to be anything
very much, by the thinness."

rom one flap of the pocketbook he drew out a wad of carefullyfolded
bank notes, and rapidly turned them over.

"undred and fifty pounds there," he remarked.  "nd what's this
papera draft on a ew York bank for two hundred.  ew York, eh  o
that's where he was bound  nd this," he went on, turning out the
other flap.  "h see this, Mr. etherwick  e'd got his passage
booked by the Maratic, sailing tonight.  m  nd Matherfield's gone
to outhampton, after aseverie.  'm beginning to see a bit into this,
 think."

"hat do you see" asked etherwick.

"ell, it looks to me as if aseverie had gone ahead to collect that
box containing the ewels, and that mbrose was to follow later, oin
him there, when aseverie had secured the loot, and that they were then
to be off with their harvest  utdo you notice thisthe name under
which the passage is booked  ot mbroseharles ndrews, suire.
ndrews  nd aseverie is asing.  asing and ndrews.  ow  wonder
if they carried on business here under these names"

"That's an unimportant detail," said etherwick.  "The important thing,
surely, isthat  ow did that man come by his death"

"ell, but  don't think that is very importantust now," replied
obmore.  "fter all, he is dead, and whether he died as the result of
a sudden seiure, or whether aseverie cleverly poisoned him before he
left, is a uestion we'll have to settle later.  ut 'll tell you
what, Mr. etherwick'll lay anything he didn't poison himself  Look
roundthere isn't a sign of anything he's been drinking out of.  o,
sirthe other man's done this.  nd if Matherfield has the luck to lay
hands on him tonightah  ut now, what was this your clerk,
Mapperley, told us as we came along about the Little mith treet
landlady coming here this afternoon"

"he was followed here by oldmark," replied etherwick.  "oldmark saw
her admit herself by a key which she took from her pocket.  he stayed
inside a few minutes, came out looking much upset, and hurried away to
her own house."

"nd now you and 'll ust hurry after her," said obmore.  "fter all,
she's living, and we'll make her find her tongue.  f course, she came
in here expecting to find this man, and to tell him somebody was on the
lookout.  ndshe found him dead  ome round there with me, Mr.
etherwick, at once."

e turned to the other detective and the constable, and after giving
them some whispered instructions, left the room, etherwick, after a
word or two with Mapperley, following him.  ut before they had reached
the outer door, they heard steps in the yard, and suddenly two men
appeared in the doorway.

f etherwick and his companion looked uestioningly at these two men,
they, on their part, looked uestioningly at obmore and etherwick.
They were youngish menetherwick set them down as respectablydressed
artisans.  That they were surprised to find anyone confronting them at
the door whereat all four now stood, was evident their surprise,
indeed, was so great that they came to a sudden halt, staring silently.
ut obmore spoke.  "anting somebody" he asked sharply.

The two strangers exchanged a glance, and the apparently elder one
replied

"ell, no" he said.  "ot that we know of.  ut might we ask if you
are  nd how you got in here  ecause this place happens to be ours"

"Yours" exclaimed obmore.  "Your property

"ell, if buying it, paying for it, and taking a receipt and papers
makes it so" answered the man.  "ought it this morningand settled
up for it, too, anyway."

obmore produced and handed over a professional card, and the faces of
the two men fell as they read it.  The elder looked up uickly.

" hope there's nothing wrong" he said anxiously.  "etectives, eh
e've laid out a nice bit on thissavings, too, and"

" don't suppose there's anything wrong that way," replied obmore
reassuringly.  "ut there's something uncommonly wrong in other ways.
ow look here, who are you two, and from whom did you buy this place"

"My name's Marshall, his is ilkinson," answered the leader.  "e're
ust starting business for ourselves as electrical engineers.  e
advertised for a likely place hereabouts, and Mr. ndrews came to us
about thissaid he and his partner, Mr. asing, were leaving, and
wanted to sell it, ust as it stood.  e came to look at it, and as
it's ust the place we need to start with, we agreed to buy it.  They
said it was their own property, and to save law expenses we carried out
the purchase between ourselves.  nd we paid over the purchase money
this morning, and got the papers and the key."

"hat time was that" asked obmore.

"Ten o'clock or thereabouts," replied Marshall.  "y appointment, here."

"id ye see both menasing and ndrews"

"oth  n that little room to the right.  e settled the
businesspaid them in cashand settled all up.  t was soon done,
then they stood us a drink and a cigar, and we went."

"tood you a drink, eh" said obmore suddenly.  "here"

"ere  asing, he pulled out a big bottle of champagne and a
cigarbox, and said we'd wet the bargain.  e'd a glass apiece,
ilkinson and me, then we left 'em to finish the bottle we were in a
hurry.  utis anything wrong"

"hat is wrong, my lad, is that the man you know as ndrews is lying
dead upstairs" replied obmore.  "oisoned, most likely, by his
partner.  ut, as  said ust now,  don't suppose there's anything
wrong about your buying the property, providing you can show a title to
it you say you've got the necessary papers"

Marshall clapped a hand on the pocket of his coat.

"ot 'em all here, now," he said.  "utdid you say ndrews was
deadpoisoned  hy, he was as alive as  am when we left the two of
'em together.  They were finishing the bottle"

"Look here," interrupted obmore.  "ait awhile until we come
backwe've some important work close by.  There are people of ours
upstairstell them  said you were to wait a bit.  ow, Mr.
etherwick."

utside the yard and in the crowded street, obmore turned to his
companion with a cynical laugh.

"hampagneto wet the bargain" he said.  "Left them to finish it, eh
nd no doubt what finished mbrose was in that champagneslipped in by
aseverie when his back was turned.  'll tell you what it is, Mr.
etherwick, that chap's a thoroughpaced 'unhe goes the whole hog  
only hope he won't be too deep for Matherfield at outhampton   shall
be anxious till  hear."

"s it possible for him to escape Matherfield" exclaimed etherwick.
"ow can he   look on him as being as good as in custody already
e's bound to call at the post office for that box."

"s he, though" interrupted the detective, with another incredulous
laugh.  "'m not so sure about that, Mr. etherwick.  aseverie is
evidently an accomplished scoundrel, and full of all sorts of tricks
'll tell ye what 'm wonderingwill that parcel ever get to
outhampton post office, where it's to be called for"

"hatever do you mean" demanded etherwick.  "t's in the post
osted this morning."

"o doubt," agreed obmore dryly.  "y special delivery, eh  nd when
it gets to outhampton tation, it's got to be taken to the head post
office, hasn't it"

"ell" asked etherwick.

"There's many a slip twixt cup and lipso the old saying goes,"
replied obmore.  "That parcel may slip.  ut isn't this the number
your clerk mentioned"

The door of Mrs. Mallett's house looked more closely barred than
everif possible.  nd no answer came to several summonses by bell and
knocker.  ut presently obmore tried the handlethe door opened at
his touch.

"allo" he exclaimed.  "pen  m  That seems a bit ueer.
ellinside"

or the second time that afternoon, etherwick walked into a place that
seemed to be wholly deserted.




T 

TL

The detective, walking a little in advance of his companion, stepped
forward to a halltable and knocked loudly on its polished surface.  o
answer came.  e went further along, to the head of a railed stair
which evidently communicated with a cellar kitchen again he knocked,
more loudly than before, on an adacent panel, and again got no reply.
nd at that, turning back along the hall, he opened the door of the
room which faced upon the street, and he and etherwick looked in.  
mustysmelling, closecurtained room that, a sort of unday parlour,
little used, cold and comfortless in its formality.  ut the room
behind it, to which obmore turned next, showed signs of recent
occupancy and life.  There was a fire in the grate, with an easy chair
drawn near to it on the table close by lay women's geara heap of
linen, with needle and thread thrust in, a workbasket, scissors,
thimble it reuired no more than a glance to see that the owner of
these innocent matters had laid them down suddenly, suddenly
interrupted in her task.

"'ll tell you what it is, Mr. etherwick" exclaimed obmore abruptly.
"This house is empty  mpty of people, anyway."

"ilent enough, to be sure," agreed etherwick.  "The woman"

"You've frightened her by calling here," said obmore.  "Then she
slipped round to encove treet.  nd there she found mbrose dead
he's some connection with him and aseverie, because she possesses a
key that admits to that yard.  nd finding mbrose dead, she came back
here, got her things and cleared out.  There isn't a soul in this
house.  'll lay anything on that"

"t struck me that this might be the place where the two ladies were
detained," remarked etherwick.

"e'll soon see about that," declared obmore.  "ome upstairswe'll
search the place from top to bottom.  ut stop, downstairs first."

e ran down the stair to the cellar kitchen, with etherwick at his
heels.  nd at the door he laughed, pointing within.

"Look there" he exclaimed.  " told you you'd interrupted things.
ee there's one teatray, laid out all ready for twocups and
saucers, teapot, bread and butter cut, cake.  There's another for one.
nd there's the kettle, singing away like a bird on a bough.  hat's
that mean  The woman was going to carry up tea for two, somewhere
t'other tray was for herself.  ell, you nipped that in the bud she'll
have to get her tea somewhere.  utthe others  ome upstairs."

oing back to the hall, he led the way up the main staircase.  There
were two stories above the ground floor on the first were rooms the
doors of which, being opened, or being found open, revealed nothing but
ordinary things of these rooms there were three, opening off a main
landing.  ut on the next floor there were only two rooms one was
unfurnished at the door of the other, a few inches aar, the detective
immediately paused.

"Look you there, now, Mr. etherwick" he said, pointing here and
there.  "ere's recent work  o you see that a strong bolt, more like
a bar, has been fitted on the outside of this door, and the door itself
fitted with a new patent lock, key outside  nd, good Lord a chain as
well.  Might be in a gaol  ut what's inside"

e pushed the door open and revealed a large room, fitted with two
small beds, easy chairs, a table on which books, magaines, newspapers
lay on the table, too, was fancywork which, it was evident, had been
as hastily laid aside as the sewing downstairs.  etherwick bent over
the things, but obmore went to the one window.

"aol, did  say" he exclaimed.  "hy, this is a gaol  Look here, Mr.
etherwickwindow morticed inside and fitted with iron bars outside.
ven if whoever's been in here could have opened the window, and if
there'd been no bars there, they couldn't have done anything though,
for there's nothing but a high blank wall oppositeback of some
factory or other, apparently.  ut what's this" he added, opening a
door that stood in a corner.  "m small bathroom.  nd this," he
continued, going to a suare hatch set in the wall next to the
staircase.  "h trap big enough to hand things like small trays
through, but not big enough for a grown person to sueee through.
ell,  shouldn't wonder if you're right, Mr. etherwickthis,
probably, is where these ladies were locked up.  utthey're gone"

etherwick was looking round.  uddenly his eyes lighted on a familiar
obect.  e stepped forward, and from a chair near one of the beds,
picked up a handbag of green silk.  e knew it well enough.

"That settles it" he exclaimed.  "They have been here  This is Miss
an mean Miss eatherstone's bag've seen her carry it often.
These are her things in itpurse, cardcase, so on.  he's left it
behind her."

"ye, ust so" agreed obmore.  "s  say, they all left in a hurry.
 figure it out like this the woman, who, of course, acted as sort of
gaoler to these two unfortunate ladies, when she made that discovery
round yonder, came back here, got her outdoor things, and cleared off.
ut before she went, she'd the decency to slip up here, undo that
chain, slip the bolt back, and turn the key  Then, no doubt, she made
tracks at express speed, leaving the ladies to do what they liked.  nd
they, Mr. etherwick, having a bit o' common sense about 'em, did what
 should ha' donethey hooked it as uick as possible.  That's that,
sir"

etherwick thrust hona's handbag into his pocket and made for the door.

"Then 'm off, obmore," he said.  " must try to find out where
they've gone.  've an idea probably they'd go to enteney's office.
'll go there.  utyou"

"h, 'm going back to encove treet," answered obmore.  "lenty to
do there.  ut off you go after the ladies, Mr. etherwick, there's
nothing you can do round here now.  'll keep that clerk of yours a
bit, and the ew chapthey might come in.  e shall have some nice
revelations in the papers tomorrow, 'm thinking, especially if
Matherfield has the luck he expects."

"hat are you going to do about this house" asked etherwick as they
went downstairs.  "o you think the woman will come back"

"et your life she won't" answered obmore.  "ot she   should think
she's halfway across Londonnorth, south, east or west, by this.
ouse  hy,  shall ust lock the front door and put the key in my
pocket.  e shall want to search this house narrowly."

etherwick bade him goodday for the time being, and hurried off to
ictoria treet, to fling himself into the first disengaged taxicab he
encountered, and to bid its driver go as speedily as possible to
Lincoln's nn ields.  e was anxious about honaand yet he felt that
she was safe.  nd he was inuisitive, too he wanted to hear her
story, to find out what had happened behind the scenes.  e felt sure
of finding her at enteney's office she and Madame Listorelle, once
released from their prison, would naturally go there.

ut the clerk whom he encountered as soon as he rushed into the outer
office, damped his spirits at once by shaking his head.

"Mr. enteney's not in, sir," he answered.  "e was in until not so
long ago, but he got a telephone call and went out immediately
afterwards.  o,  don't know who it was that rang him up, Mr.
etherwick, nor where he went seemed a bit excited when he went out,
and was in a fearful hurry."

etherwick concluded that Madame Listorelle had summoned enteney, and
that he had gone to meet her and hona.  e went away, somewhat at a
lossthen, remembering that Matherfield had promised to wire from
outhampton, he turned towards his chambers.  t the foot of the stairs
he met his caretaker.

"een a young lady here inuiring for you, Mr. etherwick," said the
man.  "een here twice.   said  didn't know when you'd be inany
time or no time.  he saidbut there is the young lady, sircoming
back"

etherwick turned sharply and saw hona coming across the suare.
urrying to meet her and disregarding whatever eyes might be watching
them, he took both her hands in his in a fashion that brought the
colour to her cheeks.

"You're all rightsafe" he asked uickly.

"ure"

"'m all right and uite safe, thank you," she answered.  "'ve been
here twice before, but you were out.   came to borrow some money.  
left my bag and purse inthe place where we were locked up, and"

etherwick pulled out the handbag and silently gave it to her.  he
stared at him.

"You've beenthere" she exclaimed.  "ow"

"ot in this afternoon, an hour ago," he answered.  "ere, come up to
my rooms  e can't stand talking here.  Madame Listorellewhere's
she"

" left her at ictoria, telephoning to Maor enteney," replied hona.
"he, too, had no money.  he wanted me to wait until Maor enteney
arrived, but  wouldn't.   walked here.   thought you'd want to
know that we'd got outat last."

etherwick said nothing until they had entered his sittingroom.  Then,
staring silently at her, he put his hands on hona's shoulders, and
after a long look at her, suddenly and impulsively bent and kissed her.

"y gad" he said in a low voice.  " didn't know how anxious  was
about you until  saw you ust now  utnow  know"

Then, ust as suddenly, he turned away from her, and in a
matteroffact manner lighted his stove, put on a kettle of water, and
began preparations which indicated his intention of making tea.  hona,
from an easy chair into which he had unceremoniously thrust her,
watched him.

"Liberty" she said suddenly.  "e're both discovering something.  hen
you've been locked up, day and night, for a while"

"ow was it" he asked, turning on her.  "f course, we know all about
the kidnappingbut the rest, until today  aseverie, of course"

"aseverie and another man," she answered.  " tall, cleanshaven man,
whose name we never heard.  ut aseverie was the chief villain.  s to
how it was, they met us at the sunk road at iversreade, forced us at
the point of revolvers into a car, and drove us off to Londonto
estminsterand into a house there, the house you've been in.
There"

" moment," said etherwick, who was finding cups and saucers.  "The
driver of that car  e must have been an accomplice."

"o doubt, but we never saw him again.  e only saw those two and a
woman who acted as gaoler and brought our meals.  e were fed all
right, and they gave us books and papers, and actually provided us with
fancy work.  ut they were inexorable about madame and her ewels.
They must have known all about them, because they got her own
notepaper"

" know all about that," said etherwick.  "'ll tell you my side of it
when you've had some tea.  orced her,  suppose, to write the letters"

"They forced her to do that ust as they forced us into the car," said
hona, "with revolvers  ndthey meant it.   suppose they've got the
ewels now"

"emains to be seen," replied etherwick.  "id Madame Listorelle
happen to tell you what those ewels were worth"

"he talked about little else.  etween eighty and ninety thousand
pounds.  he's in an awful state about them.  ut it was literally a
uestion of her life or her ewels.   don't know what they'd have done
with me.  ut now'm all right"

etherwick opened a tin box, and producing a plum cake, held it up for
hona to inspect.

"hat d'you think of that for a cake" he asked admiringly.  "resent
from my old aunt in the countryreal, proper cake that.  Yes," he went
on, setting the cake on the table, "yes, yes you're all right now.
ut, by eorge"

hona said nothing she saw that his relief at seeing her was greater
and deeper than he cared to show.  he poured out the tea they sat
discussing the recent events until dusky shadows began to fall over the
whole room.

" ought to be getting back to iversreade," she remarked at last.
"t's late."

"ait a bit" said etherwick, who by that time had told her all he
knew.  "There'll be a wire from Matherfield before long.  on't go down
to iversreade tonight.  Telephone to Lady iversreade that you're
staying in town.  er sister will be there by now, and will have told
her everything.  ait till we get the wire from Matherfield then we'll
go and dine somewhere, and you can put up at your old hotel in urrey
treet for the night.   want you to know what's happened at
outhampton and"

e broke off as a knock came at his outer door.

"That'll be Matherfield's wire," he exclaimed "ow then"

 moment later he came back to her with the message in his hand.

"t is from Matherfield," he said.  "anded in outhampton est
sixnineteen.  oesn't say if he's got him  ll he says is 'Meet me
aterloo, arriving eighttwenty.'  ell"

" wonder" said hona.  "ut aseverie is"

"ust what obmore says," muttered etherwick.

"owever" he looked at his watch.  "ome along," he continued.
"e've ust time to get some dinnerat aterlooand to be on the
platform when the eighttwenty comes in.  f only we could see
aseverie in charge of Matherfield and uigman first it would give me
an appetite"

The vast space between the station buildings and the entrance to the
platform at aterloo was thronged when etherwick and hona came out of
the restaurant at ten minutes past eight.  etherwick was inuiring as
to which platform the outhampton train would come in at when he felt a
light touch on his arm.  Turning sharply he saw obmore.  obmore gave
him a uiet smile, coupled with an informing wink.

"uess you're on the same ob, Mr. etherwick," he said.  "ire from
Matherfield, eh"

"Yes," replied etherwick.  "nd you"

"ame here," assented obmore.  "ust to say  was to be here for the
eighttwentywith help," he added significantly.  "'ve got the help
there's four of us round about.  eard anything of those ladies, Mr.
etherwick"

"ere is one of them," replied etherwick, indicating hona.  "They're
safe.  You'll hear all about it later.  ut this businesswhat do you
make of Matherfield's wire  as he failed"

"'ll tell you what  make of it," answered obmore.  " think you'll
find that aseverie is on the train, with Matherfield and uigman in
close attendance.  or some reason of his own, Matherfield means to
arrest aseverie herehere  That's how  figure it.  They've seen
aseverie there and decided to follow him back to town.  s soon as
that train's in"

 sudden, sharp exclamation from hona interrupted him and made both
men turn to her.  he clutched etherwick's arm, at the same time
pointing with the other hand across the space behind them.

"aseveriehimself" she said.  "Thereunder that clock  ee  e's
going towards the gates"

ith a swift and unceremonious gesture obmore laid a hand on hona's
shoulder, twisted her round and drew her amongst a group of bystanders.

"eep out of sight, miss" he muttered.  "e'll know you  ow,
againwhich man.  That with the pale face and high hat   see him.
ood to remember, too.  ll right  top here, you two.  f he moves in
this direction, Mr. etherwick, move away anywhere.  ait"

obmore slipped away.   moment later they saw him speak to a couple of
uietlooking men, who presently glanced at aseverie.  etherwick was
watching aseverie, too.  aseverie, uiet, unconcerned, evidently
wholly unsuspicious, had taken up a position at the exit through which
the outhampton passengers must emerge he was smoking a cigar,
placidly, with obvious appreciation.

"You're certain that's the man" whispered etherwick.

"aseverie  ositive" declared hona.  "s if  could mistake him
've too good reason to remember his whole appearance.  uthere
aring"

"ell," said etherwick, "something's going to happen  eep backkeep
well back  e can see things from here without being seen.  f he
caught sight of you"

obmore came strolling back and oined them.

"ll right" he murmured.  "our pairs of eyes, beside oursthat's
three pairs moreon him  My men are close up to him, too.  ee 'em
ne, two, three, four  ll round him, though he doesn't know.  
shan't let him go, whether Matherfield turns up or not.  ool customer,
eh"

"The train's due," said etherwick.  e had hona's hand within his
arm, and he felt it tremble.  "Yes," he whispered, bending down to her,
"that's how  feel.  Tense moment, this.  ut that scoundrel there"

aseverie was glancing at the big clock.  e turned from it to the
platform behind the gates, looking expectantly along its lighted
surface.  The others looked, too.   minute passed.  Then, out of the
gloom at the further extremity of the vast station, an engine appeared,
slowly dragging its burden of carriages and came sighing like a weary
giant up the side of the platform.  The passengers in the front
compartments leapt out and began filing towards the exit.

"ow for it," muttered obmore.  "eep back, you two  My men'll watch
himand whoever's here to meet him, for he's expecting somebody."

othing happened for the first minute.  The crowd of discharged
passengers, men and women, civilians, soldiers, sailors, filed out and
went their ways.  radually it thinned.  Then etherwick's arm was
suddenly gripped by hona for the second time, and he saw that she was
staring at something beyond the barrier.

"There" she exclaimed.  "Therethe man in the grey coat and fawn hat
That's the man who drove the car  ee  aseverie sees him"

etherwick looked and saw aseverie lift a hand in recognition of a
young, freshfaced man, who was nearing the ticketcollectors, and who
carried in his right hand a small, suare parcel.  ut he saw more.
lose behind this young man came Matherfield on one hand and uigman on
the other.  They drew closer as he neared the gate, and on its other
side the detectives drew closer to aseverie.

"ow then," whispered obmore, and stole swiftly forward.

t was all over so swiftly that neither etherwick nor hona knew
exactly how the thing was done.  efore they had realised that the men
were trapped, or the gaping bystanders had realised that something was
happening under their very noses, aseverie and his man were two safely
handcuffed prisoners in the midst of a little group of silent men who
were hurrying both away.  ithin a moment captors and captives were
lost in the outer reaches of the station.  Then the two watchers
suddenly realised that Matherfield, holding the suare parcel in his
hand, was standing close by, a grim but highly satisfied smile in his
eyes.  e held the parcel up before them.

"ery neat, Mr. etherwick, very neat indeed" he said.  "ncommonly
neateh"

ut etherwick knew that he was not referring to the parcel.




T 

T 

hona went back to her old uarters at the little hotel in urrey
treet for that night, and next morning etherwick came round to her,
with an armful of newspapers.  inding her alone, he laid them on the
table at her side with a significant nod of his head at certain big
black letters which topped the uppermost columns.

"Matherfield must have given plenty of informing news to the pressmen
last night," he remarked with a grim smile.  "t's all in therehis
own adventures at outhampton yesterday mine and obmore's in
estminster, and all the rest of it.   believe the newspaper people
call this sort of thing a storyand a fine story it makes  inding
up, of course, with the dramatic arrest of aseverie at aterloo  'm
afraid we're in for publicity for a time, worse luck"

"hall weshall have to appear at that man's trial" asked hona.

"That's unavoidable, 'm afraid, and at other things before that,"
answered etherwick.  "There'll be the proceedings before the
magistrate, and the adourned inuest, and so on.  an't be helped and
there'll be some satisfaction in knowing that we're ridding the world
of a peculiarly cruel and coldblooded murderer  That chap aseverie
is certainly as consummate a villain as  ever heard of.   human
spiderand clever in his webspinning.  ut  wish one had a few more
particulars on one pointand yet  don't see how one's to get them."

"hat point" asked hona.

"That sealed packet, containing the details, or formula, or whatever it
is, of your grandfather's invention," replied etherwick.  "here is
it  hat, precisely, is it  id mbrose get it from him  as
aseverie got it  o far as  can make out, the whole thing began with
that.  hether it was really worth a farthing or a fortune, your
grandfather brought to London something which he honestly believed to
be of great value, and there's no doubt that he got into the hands of
those two men, mbrose and aseverie, because of it.  There's no doubt,
either, that in conversation with them, he told them, perhaps okingly,
what he knew about Madame Listorelle.  or is there any doubt that
these two murdered him.  or is there any doubt, in my mind, as to
how they murdered him  You must remember that both men were trained
medical men, and, obviously of a scientific turn of mind into the
bargain.  ach had doubtless made a deep study of poisons.  uch a
knowledge is of value to such men as they weremen of criminal
tendencies.  robably they knew of a subtle poison easily administered,
the effects of which would not be evident for some hours.  o doubt
they timed their work, so that their victim should die swiftly and
suddenly when well away from their laboratory.  nd, of course, they
did the same thing in the case of ranett.  ranett paid the penalty of
being with your grandfather.  ut for what did they murder your
grandfather  id they get rid of him so that they could keep his
secret about Madame Listorelle to themselves, and blackmail her and her
sister, or that they could rob him of his invention and turn it to
their own profit  f the latter, then"

e paused, looking inuiringly at hona, as if he expected her to see
what he was after.  ut hona shook her head.

" don't follow," she said.  "hat then"

"This," replied etherwick.  "f their desire to get hold of your
grandfather's secret was their motive, then that secret's worth a lot
of money  Money which ought to come to you.  on't you see  here is
the secret  here's the sealed packet   suppose the police would
search aseverie last nightperhaps they found it on him.  e shall
hearbut, anyway it's yours."

hona made a gesture of aversion.

" should hate to touch or have anything to do with it if it had been
in that man's possession" she said.  "ut  don't think there's any
doubt that they murdered my grandfather because of that secret.  nly,
 think, too, they'd a double motive.  The secret about Madame
Listorelle was their second string.  robably they believed that Lady
iversreade would be an easy prey.  nd  think she would have been, if
she hadn't had Maor enteney to fall back on.   know she was
dreadfully upset after aseverie's first visit.  o  put it this
wayalways have done they thought they could sell grandfather's
invention for a lot of money, and get another lot out of Lady
iversreade and Madame Listorelle as blackmail."

"lack money, indeed, all of it" exclaimed etherwick.  "ell"

 womanservant put her head into the little parlour in which they were
sitting, and looked significantly at hona.

"There's a policeman downstairs, miss, asking for you," she announced.
"Leastways, he wants to know if you can tell him if Mr. etherwick's
here or been here."

etherwick went to the head of the stair a policeman standing in the
hall below looked up and touched his helmet.

"nspector Matherfield's compliments, sir, and could you step round and
bring Miss annaford with you" he asked.  "There's new developments,
Mr. etherwick.  mportant"

"e'll come at once," assented etherwick.  "Ten minutes"  e went
back and hurried hona away.  "hat now" he asked as they hastened
towards Matherfield's office.  "erhaps they've extracted something out
of aseverie  r possibly the newspapers have attracted the attention
of somebody who can give further news"

The last suggestion strengthened itself when, on entering Matherfield's
room, they found him closeted with two strangers whose appearance was
that of responsible and welltodo commercial men.  ll three were
discovered in what looked like a serious and deep conversation, and
etherwick was uick to notice that the two unknown men looked at hona
with unusual interest.  Matherfield made haste to introduce her as the
late exuperintendent annaford's granddaughter, and etherwick as a
gentleman who had been much concerned in the recent proceedings.

"These gentlemen, Miss annaford and Mr. etherwick," he proceeded,
waving his hand at the others, "are Messrs. ulthwaite and ouseover,
manufacturing chemists, of ast amincidentally, they've also a big
place in Lancashire.  nd having seen this morning's papers, in which,
as you've no doubt noticed, there's a good deal about our affair,
they've come straight to me with some news which will prove uncommonly
useful when aseverie's put in the dock before the magistrate this
afternoon.  The fact is, Mr. etherwick, these gentlemen have supplied
a missing link"

"hat link" asked etherwick eagerly.

Matherfield nodded at the elder of the two men, ulthwaite, who
produced a pocketbook, and extracted from it a sheet of paper.
ilently, he passed it over to Matherfield, who turned to hona.

"ow, Miss annaford," he said, with a note of triumph in his voice, "
dare say you can positively identify your grandfather's handwriting and
his way of making figures  an you swear that this has been written by
him"

hona gave but one glance at the paper before looking up with a glance
of positive assertion.

"h, yes" she exclaimed.  "That is his writing, without a doubt
othing could be more certain"

Matherfield turned to etherwick.

"That's the formula for the ink" he said.  "ow we've got the big
thing we wanted  nd Mr. ulthwaite will tell you how he got it."

ulthwaite, after allowing etherwick to look at the paper, carefully
replaced it in his pocketbook.  There was an air of anxiety about him
and about his partner concerning which etherwick began to make
guessesthey looked as if they were uncertain and uneasy.  ut
ulthwaite was ready enough to tell his story.

"e got it in this way," he said.  "nd  may as well say, as 've
already said to you, Mr. Matherfield, that  don't think we should have
got it at all if you police people hadn't been so reticent on that one
particular pointif you'd noised it abroad about annaford's secret we
might have been forewarned.  owever, some little time ago, a man whom
we knew as asing, and whom  firmly believe to be the aseverie that
we've read about in the papers this morninga man, mind you, that we'd
done business with now and then during the last year or socame to us
and offered us the formula for a new black ink which he asserted would
drive every known ink off the market, all over the world  e made
extravagant claims for it he swore it was the first absolutely perfect
writing fluid ever invented.  e brought a sample of it which he'd made
up himselfhe put it to various tests.  ut he did morehe offered us
the use of the secret formula so that we ourselves could make and test
it before deciding whether we'd fall in with his suggestion, which was
that we should offer him a lump cash sum for the formula.  ell, we did
make the ink, from the formula, and we did test it, and there is no
doubt about itit is all, and perhaps more, that asing, or aseverie
claimed for its excellence.   needn't go into the drawbacks attaching
to most wellknown inksthis has none of them.  nd when asing came
back to us, a few days ago, we decided to buy the formula from him.  e
agreed upon a cash price, and day before yesterday we paid the amount
overat our office in ast am."

"Yes" said etherwick uietly.  "ndwhat was the price agreed upon"

The two partners exchanged a glance it seemed to hona, who was
watching them intently, that they looked more uneasy than before.  ut
ulthwaite replied with promptitude.

"Ten thousand pounds"

"ow did you pay him" asked etherwick.  "n cash"

"oby open cheue, at his own reuest.  That, of course, was as good
as cash.  ut," continued ulthwaite, "as soon as we read the
newspapers this morning, wethat is, , for  read the whole thing on
my way to businesswent at once to our bank to see if the cheue had
been cashed.  t hadan hour or two after we'd handed it to asing.
e'd taken the amount in ank of ngland notes."

etherwick looked at Matherfield.

"f course," he remarked, as if he were asking a uestion, "that
formula belongs to Miss annaford  aseverie had no right to sell
ithe stole it"

"That's the fact, Mr. etherwick," assented Matherfield.  "These
gentlemen, innocently enough, bought stolen property.  ut 've ust
told them something that 'll now tell you.  e found the
moneynoteson aseverie, last night.  ntactin his pocketbook.
f course, with that, and the ewels which his accomplice succeeded in
getting at outhampton, he'd got a nice haul.  ut now we can easily
prove how he came by that ten thousandand it'll go back to Messrs.
ulthwaite and ouseover there.  e can prove, too, from their
evidence, that aseverie poisoned Mr. annaford for the sake of that
formula.  aseverie's done"

"These gentlemen will recover their ten thousand pounds, then" said
etherwick.  "n that case"he turned to the two partners" don't
see that you've anything to worry about" he suggested.  "The formula,
of course, must be handed over to"

"ell, now, that's ust it, Mr. etherwick," interrupted the partner
who until then had kept silent.  "The fact is, sir, we don't want to
lose that formula  e gave this man aring or aseverie ten thousand
pounds for it, but"

"ut you really believe it to be worth more, eh" said etherwick with
a smile.  " see  Then in that case"

"f we get back our ten thousand, sir, we shall be pleased to treat
with the rightful owner," said ulthwaite, after an exchange of looks
with his partner.  "n the meantime, the formula is safe and secret
with us.  e are wellknown people"

"e'll leave it at that, ust now," answered etherwick.  "Miss
annaford will trust you to keep your word about safety and secrecy.
nd laterbusiness"  e got up, and hona rose with him.  "hall you
want us today, Matherfield" he asked.  "f not"

"o" replied Matherfield.  "Merely formal business todaythen, this
afternoon, he'll be brought up.  nly evidence of arrest and
application for adournment.  You can go away, Mr. etherwickwe'll
let you both know when you're wanted."

etherwick led hona out, and once clear of the police precincts, smote
his stick on the pavement.

"hen we're through with this business 'm hanged if  ever dabble in
crime affairs again, personally" he exclaimed.  "aseverie has been a
pretty vile example to tackle  nd that you should be dragged into it,
too" he added, suddenly.  "That upset me more than anything.  owever,
it's getting to an end, and then"

e paused, while she looked up at him with a little wonder at his
vehemence.  Then, and as they were at that moment walking along a uiet
stretch of the less freuented side of the mbankment, she timidly laid
a hand on his arm.  e turned sharply, laying his hand on hers.

" think you've been very considerate and thoughtful for me," she said.
"fter allit wasn't uite mere interest in crime that made you"

"ood Lord, no" he exclaimed uickly.  "t first, perhaps, half
thathalf you   feltsomehowthat 'd got to look after you.  nd
thenand when you disappearedbut  believe 'm a bit muddleheaded
'll tell you somethingall that time you were lost, well, 
scarcely ever slept  ondering, you know.  nd when you turned up
yesterday afternoonbut  want to ask you something that 'm not uite
clear about was certainly muddled ust then"

"hat is it" she asked.

etherwick bent down to her and dropped his voice.

" was so glad, so relieved to see you, yesterday afternoon," he said,
"thatthat  felt daedeh  nd  want to knowdid  kiss you"

hona suddenly looked up at himand laughed.

"h, really, how amusing you are" she said.  "hy, of course, you did
Twice"

"That's good" he exclaimed.  " thought perhaps 'd dreamt it.
utdid you kiss me"

"o you really want to be dead sure" asked hona mischievously.  "ery
well did"

"That's better" said etherwick.




T 









nd of roect utenberg's The haring ross Mystery, by . . letcher

   T T T  T   MYTY 

 This file should be named .txt or .ip 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in
        httpwww.gutenberg.org

roduced by l aines
pdated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

reating the works from print editions not protected by .. copyright
law means that no one owns a nited tates copyright in these works,
so the oundation and you can copy and distribute it in the nited
tates without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. pecial rules, set forth in the eneral Terms of se part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing roect
utenbergtm electronic works to protect the T Ttm
concept and trademark. roect utenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eooks, unless you receive
specific permission. f you do not charge anything for copies of this
eook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
awayyou may do practically YT in the nited tates with eooks
not protected by .. copyright law. edistribution is subect to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

TT LL L

T LL T T L
L  T  Y TT   T 

To protect the roect utenbergtm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "roect
utenberg", you agree to comply with all the terms of the ull
roect utenbergtm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.orglicense.

ection . eneral Terms of se and edistributing roect
utenbergtm electronic works

.. y reading or using any part of this roect utenbergtm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
trademarkcopyright agreement. f you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of roect utenbergtm electronic works in your
possession. f you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
roect utenbergtm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
...

.. "roect utenberg" is a registered trademark. t may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most roect utenbergtm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. ee
paragraph . below. There are a lot of things you can do with roect
utenbergtm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to roect utenbergtm
electronic works. ee paragraph . below.

.. The roect utenberg Literary rchive oundation "the
oundation" or L, owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of roect utenbergtm electronic works. early all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the nited
tates. f an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
nited tates and you are located in the nited tates, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to roect utenberg are removed. f course, we hope
that you will support the roect utenbergtm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing roect utenbergtm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
roect utenbergtm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full roect utenbergtm License when
you share it without charge with others.

.. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. opyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. f you are outside the nited tates,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other roect utenbergtm work. The oundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the nited tates.

.. nless you have removed all references to roect utenberg

... The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full roect utenbergtm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a roect utenbergtm work any work
on which the phrase "roect utenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "roect utenberg" is associated is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed

  This eook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited tates and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or reuse it
  under the terms of the roect utenberg License included with this
  eook or online at www.gutenberg.org. f you are not located in the
  nited tates, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

... f an individual roect utenbergtm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by .. copyright law does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder, the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the nited tates without paying any fees or charges. f you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "roect
utenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the reuirements of paragraphs .. through .. or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the roect utenbergtm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs .. or ...

... f an individual roect utenbergtm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .. through .. and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. dditional terms
will be linked to the roect utenbergtm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

... o not unlink or detach or remove the full roect utenbergtm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with roect utenbergtm.

... o not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the roect
utenbergtm License.

... You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. owever, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a roect utenbergtm work in a format
other than "lain anilla " or other format used in the official
version posted on the official roect utenbergtm web site
www.gutenberg.org, you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon reuest, of the work in its original "lain
anilla " or other form. ny alternate format must include the
full roect utenbergtm License as specified in paragraph ...

... o not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any roect utenbergtm works
unless you comply with paragraph .. or ...

... You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing roect utenbergtm electronic works
provided that

 You pay a royalty fee of  of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of roect utenbergtm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the roect utenbergtm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the roect
  utenberg Literary rchive oundation. oyalty payments must be paid
  within  days following each date on which you prepare or are
  legally reuired to prepare your periodic tax returns. oyalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the roect
  utenberg Literary rchive oundation at the address specified in
  ection , "nformation about donations to the roect utenberg
  Literary rchive oundation."

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing or by email within  days of receipt that she
  does not agree to the terms of the full roect utenbergtm
  License. You must reuire such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of roect utenbergtm
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph .., a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of roect utenbergtm works.

... f you wish to charge a fee or distribute a roect
utenbergtm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the roect utenberg Literary rchive oundation and The
roect utenberg Trademark LL, the owner of the roect utenbergtm
trademark. ontact the oundation as set forth in ection  below.

..

... roect utenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by .. copyright law in creating the roect
utenbergtm collection. espite these efforts, roect utenbergtm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "efects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your euipment.

... LMT TY, LM  M  xcept for the "ight
of eplacement or efund" described in paragraph .., the roect
utenberg Literary rchive oundation, the owner of the roect
utenbergtm trademark, and any other party distributing a roect
utenbergtm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. Y  TT Y   M  L, TT
LLTY,   TY    TT T T
   ... Y  TT T T, T
TM ,  Y TT  T MT LL T 
LL T Y  TL, T, T, TL, T 
TL M   Y  T  T LTY  
M.

... LMT T  LMT    f you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money if any you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. f you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. f you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. f
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

... xcept for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .., this work is provided to you '', T 
T T  Y ,   ML, L T T
LMT T T  MTLTY  T  Y .

... ome states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. f any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

... MTY  You agree to indemnify and hold the oundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the oundation, anyone
providing copies of roect utenbergtm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of roect utenbergtm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur a distribution of this
or any roect utenbergtm work, b alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any roect utenbergtm work, and c any
efect you cause.

ection . nformation about the Mission of roect utenbergtm

roect utenbergtm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middleaged and new computers. t
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

olunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching roect utenbergtm's
goals and ensuring that the roect utenbergtm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. n , the roect
utenberg Literary rchive oundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for roect utenbergtm and future
generations. To learn more about the roect utenberg Literary
rchive oundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
ections  and  and the oundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



ection . nformation about the roect utenberg Literary rchive oundation

The roect utenberg Literary rchive oundation is a non profit
c educational corporation organied under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the nternal
evenue ervice. The oundation's  or federal tax identification
number is . ontributions to the roect utenberg Literary
rchive oundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
.. federal laws and your state's laws.

The oundation's principal office is in airbanks, laska, with the
mailing address  ox , airbanks,  , but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. ts business office is located at  orth  est, alt
Lake ity, T ,  . mail contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the oundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.orgcontact

or additional contact information

    r. regory . ewby
    hief xecutive and irector
    gbnewbypglaf.org

ection . nformation about onations to the roect utenberg
Literary rchive oundation

roect utenbergtm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of euipment including outdated euipment. Many small donations
 to , are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the .

The oundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all  states of the nited
tates. ompliance reuirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these reuirements. e do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To 
T or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate

hile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation reuirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

nternational donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the nited tates. .. laws alone swamp our small staff.

lease check the roect utenberg eb pages for current donation
methods and addresses. onations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate

ection . eneral nformation bout roect utenbergtm electronic works.

rofessor Michael . art was the originator of the roect
utenbergtm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. or forty years, he produced and
distributed roect utenbergtm eooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

roect utenbergtm eooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the .. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our eb site which has the main  search
facility www.gutenberg.org

This eb site includes information about roect utenbergtm,
including how to make donations to the roect utenberg Literary
rchive oundation, how to help produce our new eooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eooks.

