Proect utenbergs The ythology of the ritish Islands, by harles uire

This eook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited tates and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or reuse it under the terms of
the Proect utenberg License included with this eook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the nited tates, youll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title The ythology of the ritish Islands
       An Introduction to eltic yth, Legend, Poetry, and omance

Author harles uire

elease ate April ,  Eook 

Language English

haracter set encoding TF

 TAT F TI PET TEE E YTLY 




Produced by W and the nline istributed Proofreading
Team at httpwww.pgdp.net This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
ArchiveAmerican Libraries.






                          TE YTLY F TE
                            ITI ILA






                             TE YTLY
                             F TE ITI
                                ILA

                           A ITTI T
                          ELTI YT, LEE
                          PETY, A AE

                           Y ALE IE

                    L LAIE A  LIITE
                     L AILEY, E.. LAW A
                           LI        






                                PEFAE


This book is what its author believes to be the only attempt yet made to
put the English reader into possession, in clear, compact, and what it
is hoped may prove agreeable, form, of the mythical, legendary, and
poetic traditions of the earliest inhabitants of our islands who have
left us written recordsthe aelic and the ritish elts. It is true
that admirable translations and paraphrases of much of aelic mythical
saga have been recently published, and that Lady harlotte uests
translation of the abinogion has been placed within the reach of the
least wealthy reader. ut these books not merely each cover a portion
only of the whole ground, but, in addition, contain little elucidatory
matter. Their characters stand isolated and unexplained and the details
that would explain them must be sought for with considerable trouble in
the lectures and essays of scholars to learned societies. The reader to
whom this literature is entirely new is introduced, as it were, to
numerous people of whose antecedents he knows nothing and the effect is
often disconcerting enough to make him lay down the volume in despair.

ut here he will at last make the formal acuaintance of all the chief
characters of eltic myth of the aelic gods and the giants against
whom they struggled of the hampions of the ed ranch of lster,
heroes of a martial epopee almost worthy to be placed beside the tale
of Troy divine and of Finn and his Fenians. e will meet also with the
divine and heroic personages of the ancient ritons with their earliest
gods, kin to the members of the aelic Pantheon as well as with Arthur
and his nights, whom he will recognize as no mortal champions, but
belonging to the same mythic company. f all these mighty figures the
histories will be briefly recorded, from the time of their unuestioned
godhood, through their various transformations, to the last doubtful,
dying recognition of them in the present day, as fairies. Thus the
volume will form a kind of handbook to a subect of growing
importancethe socalled eltic enaissance, which is, after all, no
moreand, indeed, no lessthan an endeavour to refresh the vitality of
English poetry at its most ancient native fount.

The book does not, of course, profess to be for eltic scholars, to
whom, indeed, its author himself owes all that is within it. It aims
only at interesting the reader familiar with the mythologies of reece,
ome, and candinavia in another, and a nearer, source of poetry. Its
authors wish is to offer those who have fallen, or will fall, under the
attraction of eltic legend and romance, ust such a volume as he
himself would once have welcomed, and for which he sought in vain. It is
his hope that, in choosing from the considerable, though scattered,
translations and commentaries of students of ld aelic and ld Welsh,
he has chosen wisely, and that his readers will be able, should they
wish, to use his book as a steppingstone to the authorities themselves.
To that end it is wholly directed and its marginal notes and short
bibliographical appendix follow the same plan. They do not aspire to
anything like completeness, but only to point out the chief sources from
which he himself has drawn.

To acknowledge, as far as possible, such debts is now the authors
pleasing duty. First and foremost, he has relied upon the volumes of .
. dArbois de ubainvilles ours de Littrature celtiue, and the
ibbert Lectures for  of ohn hys, Professor of eltic in the
niversity of xford, with their seuel entitled tudies in the
Arthurian Legend. From the writings of r. Alfred utt he has also
obtained much help. With regard to direct translations, it seems almost
superfluous to refer to Lady harlotte uests abinogion and r. W.
F. kenes Four Ancient ooks of Wales, or to the work of such
wellknown aelic scholars as r. Eugene urry, r. uno eyer, r.
Whitley tokes, r. Ernest Windisch, r. tandish ayes rady to
mention no others, as contained in such publications as the evue
eltiue, the Atlantis, and the Transactions of the ssianic
ociety, in r. radys ilva adelica, r. utts oyage of
ran, on of Febal, and iss ulls uchullin aga. ut space is
lacking to do ustice to all. The reader is referred to the marginal
notes and the Appendix for the works of these and other authors, who
will no doubt pardon the use made of their researches to one whose sole
obect has been to gain a larger audience for the studies they have most
at heart.

Finally, perhaps, a word should be said upon that vexed uestion, the
transliteration of aelic. As yet there is no universal or consistent
method of spelling. The author has therefore chosen the forms which
seemed most familiar to himself, hoping in that way to best serve the
uses of others.






                                TET


           AP.                                          Page

              I. TE ITEET A IPTAE F ELTI
                   YTLY                                 

             II. TE E F  WLEE F TE
                   ELTI YTLY                          

            III. W WEE TE AIET IT            

             I. TE ELII F TE AIET IT A
                   II                                 


                   TE AELI  A TEI TIE

              . TE  F TE AEL                      

             I. TE  AIE                            

            II. TE IE F TE                     

           III. TE AELI AAT                       

             I. TE WA WIT TE IAT                   

              . TE ET F TE  Y TAL       

             I. TE  I EILE                         

            II. TE II ILIA                           

           III. E AELI LETIE                  

            I. FI A TE FEIA                      

             . TE ELIE A FALL F TE           


                   TE ITI  A TEI TIE

            I. TE  F TE IT                   

           II. TE AETE F TE  F AE       

          III. TE WI F AWE A TE EEAI
                   F                                  

            I. TE WA F EATET                   

             . TE ITIE F LIT E AE      

            I. TE YTLIAL I F AT       

           II. TE TEAE F ITAI                  

          III. TE  A I AT IT         

           I. TE ELIE A FALL F TE           


                    IAL F TE ELTI PAAI

            . IAL F TE ELTI PAAI IT
                   E TIE                            

                 APPEI                                  

                 IE                                     






                          TE YTLY F TE
                            ITI ILA




                               APTE I

                 TE ITEET A IPTAE F ELTI
                               YTLY


It should hardly be necessary to remind the reader of what profound
interest and value to every nation are its earliest legendary and
poetical records. The beautiful myths of reece form a sufficing
example. In threefold manner, they have influenced the destiny of the
people that created them, and of the country of which they were the
imagined theatre. First, in the ages in which they were still fresh,
belief and pride in them were powerful enough to bring scattered tribes
into confederation. econdly, they gave the inspiration to sculptor and
poet of an art and literature unsurpassed, if not uneualled, by any
other age or race. Lastly, when the glory that was reece had faded,
and her people had, by dint of successive invasions, perhaps even ceased
to have any right to call themselves ellenes, they have passed over
into the literatures of the modern world, and so given to reece herself
a poetic interest that still makes a petty kingdom of greater account in
the eyes of its compeers than many others far superior to it in extent
and resources.

This permeating influence of the reek poetical mythology, apparent in
all civilized countries, has acted especially upon our own. From almost
the very dawn of English literature, the reek stories of gods and
heroes have formed a large part of the stockintrade of English poets.
The inhabitants of lympus occupy, under their betterknown Latin names,
almost as great a space in English poetry as they did in that of the
countries to which they were native. From haucer downwards, they have
captivated the imagination alike of the poets and their hearers. The
magic cauldron of classic myth fed, like the eltic rail, all who
came to it for sustenance.

At last, however, its potency became somewhat exhausted. Alien and
exotic to English soil, it degenerated slowly into a convention. In the
shallow hands of the poetasters of the eighteenth century, its figures
became mere puppets. With every wood a grove, and every rustic maid a
nymph, one could only expect to find enus armed with patch and
powderpuff, ars shouldering a musket, and Apollo inspiring the
versifiers own trivial strains. The affectation killedand fortunately
killeda mode of expression which had become obsolete. mothered by ust
ridicule, and abandoned to the commonplace vocabulary of the inferior
hackwriter, classic myth became a subect which only the greatest poets
could afford to handle.

ut mythology is of such vital need to literature that, deprived of the
store of legend native to southern Europe, imaginative writers looked
for a fresh impulse. They turned their eyes to the orth. Inspiration
was sought, not from lympus, but from Asgard. oreover, it was believed
that the fount of primeval poetry issuing from candinavian and Teutonic
myth was truly our own, and that we were rightful heirs of it by reason
of the Angloaxon in our blood. And so, indeed, we are but it is not
our sole heritage. There must also run much elticthat is, truly
ritishblood in our veins. And atthew Arnold was probably right in
asserting that, while we owe to the Angloaxon the more practical
ualities that have built up the ritish Empire, we have inherited from
the eltic side that poetic vision which has made English literature the
most brilliant since the reek.

We have the right, therefore, to enter upon a new spiritual possession.
And a splendid one it is The eltic mythology has little of the heavy
crudeness that repels one in Teutonic and candinavian story. It is as
beautiful and graceful as the reek and, unlike the reek, which is the
reflection of a clime and soil which few of us will ever see, it is our
own. ivinities should, surely, seem the inevitable outgrowth of the
land they move in ow strange Apollo would appear, naked among
icebergs, or furclad Thor striding under groves of palms ut the
eltic gods and heroes are the natural inhabitants of a ritish
landscape, not seeming foreign and outofplace in a scene where there
is no vine or olive, but shading in with our homely oak and bracken,
gorse and heath.

Thus we gain an altogether fresh interest in the beautiful spots of our
own islands, especially those of the wilder and more mountainous west,
where the older inhabitants of the land lingered longest. axon conuest
obliterated much in Eastern ritain, and changed more but in the West
of England, in Wales, in cotland, and especially in legendhaunted
Ireland, the hills and dales still keep memories of the ancient gods of
the ancient race. ere and there in outh Wales and the West of England
are regionsonce mysterious and still romanticwhich the ritish elts
held to be the homes of gods or outposts of the ther World. In Ireland,
not only is there scarcely a place that is not connected in some way
with the traditionary exploits of the ed ranch hampions, or of Finn
and his mighty men, but the old deities are still remembered, dwarfed
into fairies, but keeping the same attributes and the same names as of
yore. Wordsworths complaint that, while Pelion and ssa, lympus and
Parnassus are in immortal books enrolled, not one English mountain,
though round our seagirt shore they rise in crowds, had been by the
elestial uses glorified doubtless seemed true to his own generation.
Thanks to the scholars who have unveiled the ancient aelic and ritish
mythologies, it need not be so for ours. n Ludgate ill, as well as on
many less famous eminences, once stood the temple of the ritish eus. A
mountain not far from ettwsyoed was the ritish lympus, the court
and palace of our ancient gods.

It may well be doubted, however, whether Wordsworths contemporaries
would have welcomed the mythology which was their own by right of birth
as a substitute for that of reece and ome. The inspiration of classic
culture, which Wordsworth was one of the first to break with, was still
powerful. ow some of its professors would have held their sides and
roared at the very notion of a ritish mythology Yet, all the time, it
had long been secretly leavening English ideas and ideals, none the less
potently because disguised under forms which could be readily
appreciated. Popular fancy had rehabilitated the old gods, long banned
by the priests bell, book, and candle, under various disguises. They
still lived on in legend as kings of ancient ritain reigning in a
fabulous past anterior to ulius aesarsuch were ing Lud, founder of
London ing Lear, whose legend was immortalized by hakespeare ing
rennius, who conuered ome as well as many others who will be found
filling parts in old drama. They still lived on as longdead saints of
the early churches of Ireland and ritain, whose wonderful attributes
and adventures are, in many cases, only those of their original
namesakes, the old gods, told afresh. And they still lived on in
another, and a yet more potent, way. yths of Arthur and his cycle of
gods passed into the hands of the orman storytellers, to reappear as
romances of ing Arthur and his nights of the Table ound. Thus spread
over civilized Europe, their influence was immense. Their primal poetic
impulse is still resonant in our literature we need only instance
Tennyson and winburne as minds that have come under its sway.

This diverse influence of eltic mythology upon English poetry and
romance has been elouently set forth by r. Elton in his rigins of
English istory. The religion of the ritish tribes, he writes, has
exercised an important influence upon literature. The medival romances
and the legends which stood for history are full of the fair
humanities and figures of its bright mythology. The elemental powers of
earth and fire, and the spirits which haunted the waves and streams
appear again as kings in the Irish Annals, or as saints and hermits in
Wales. The nights of the ound Table, ir ay and Tristrem and the bold
ir edivere, betray their mighty origin by the attributes they retained
as heroes of romance. It was a goddess, ea uaedam phantastica, who
bore the wounded Arthur to the peaceful valley. There was little
sunlight on its woods and streams, and the nights were dark and gloomy
for want of the moon and stars. This is the country of beron and of
ir uon of ordeaux. It is the dreamy forest of Arden. In an older
mythology, it was the realm of a ing of hadows, the country of wyn ap
udd, who rode as ir uyon in the Fairie ueene

           And knighthood took of good ir uons hand,
            When with ing beron he came to Fairyland.

To trace Welsh and Irish kings and saints and hermits back to the
elemental powers of earth and fire, and the spirits that haunted the
woods and streams of eltic imagination, and to disclose primitive
pagan deities under the medival and hristian trappings of ing
Arthurs nights will necessarily fall within the scope of this volume.
ut meanwhile the reader will probably be asking what evidence there is
that apocryphal ritish kings like Lear and Lud, and uestionable Irish
saints like ridget are really disguised eltic divinities, or that the
orte Arthur, with its love of Launcelot and the ueen, and its uest
of the oly rail, was ever anything more than an invention of the
orman romancewriters. e will demand to know what facts we really
possess about this supposed eltic mythology alleged to have furnished
their prototypes, and of what real antiuity and value are our
authorities upon it.

The answer to his uestion will be found in the next chapter.



Footnote 

  There is good ground to believe, writes r. E. W. . icholson,
  .A., the librarian of the odleian Library, in the preface to his
  recentlypublished eltic esearches, that Lancashire, West
  Yorkshire, taffordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire,
  Leicestershire, utland, ambridgeshire, Wiltshire, omerset, and part
  of ussex, are as eltic as Perthshire and orth unster that
  heshire, hropshire, erefordshire, onmouthshire, loucestershire,
  evon, orset, orthamptonshire, untingdonshire, and edfordshire are
  more soand eual to orth Wales and Leinster while uckinghamshire
  and ertfordshire exceed even this degree and are on a level with
  outh Wales and lster. ornwall, of course, is more eltic than any
  other English county, and as much so as Argyll, Invernessshire, or
  onnaught.

Footnote 

  The tudy of eltic Literature.

Footnote 

  In a sonnet written in .

Footnote 

  Elton rigins of English istory, chap. .






                               APTE II

                  TE E F  WLEE F TE
                            ELTI YTLY


We may begin by asserting with confidence that r. Elton has touched
upon a part only of the material on which we may draw, to reconstruct
the ancient ritish mythology. Luckily, we are not wholly dependent upon
the difficult tasks of resolving the fabled deeds of apocryphal Irish
and ritish kings who reigned earlier than t. Patrick or before ulius
aesar into their original form of eltic myths, of sifting the
attributes and miracles of doubtfully historical saints, or of
separating the primitive pagan elements in the legends of Arthur and his
nights from the embellishments added by the romancewriters. We have,
in addition to thesewhich we may for the present put upon one side as
secondarysources, a mass of genuine early writings which, though
posthristian in the form in which they now exist, none the less
descend from the preceding pagan age. These are contained in vellum and
parchment manuscripts long preserved from destruction in mansions and
monasteries in Ireland, cotland, and Wales, and only during the last
century brought to light, copied, and translated by the patient labours
of scholars who have grappled with the longobsolete dialects in which
they were transcribed.

any of these volumes are curious miscellanies. sually the one book of
a great house or monastic community, everything was copied into it that
the scholar of the family or brotherhood thought to be best worth
preserving. ence they contain matter of the most diverse kind. There
are translations of portions of the ible and of the classics, and of
such then popular books as eoffrey of onmouths and ennius istories
of ritain lives of famous saints, together with works attributed to
them poems and romances of which, under a thin disguise, the old aelic
and ritish gods are the heroes together with treatises on all the
subects then studiedgrammar, prosody, law, history, geography,
chronology, and the genealogies of important chiefs.

The maority of these documents were put together during a period which,
roughly speaking, lasted from the beginning of the twelfth century to
the end of the sixteenth. In Ireland, in Wales, and, apparently, also in
cotland, it was a time of literary revival after the turmoils of the
previous epoch. In Ireland, the orsemen, after long ravaging, had
settled peacefully down, while in Wales, the orman onuest had
rendered the country for the first time comparatively uiet. The
scattered remains of history, lay and ecclesiastical, of science, and of
legend were gathered together.

f the Irish manuscripts, the earliest, and, for our purposes, the most
important, on account of the great store of ancient aelic mythology
which, in spite of its dilapidated condition, it still contains, is in
the possession of the oyal Irish Academy. nluckily, it is reduced to a
fragment of one hundred and thirtyeight pages, but this remnant
preserves a large number of romances relating to the old gods and heroes
of Ireland. Among other things, it contains a complete account of the
epical saga called the Tin  huailgn, the aiding of the attle
of ooley, in which the hero, uchulainn, performed his greatest feats.
This manuscript is called the ook of the un ow, from the tradition
that it was copied from an earlier book written upon the skin of a
favourite animal belonging to aint iaran, who lived in the seventh
century. An entry upon one of its pages reveals the name of its scribe,
one aelmuiri, whom we know to have been killed by robbers in the church
of lonmacnois in the year .

Far more voluminous, and but little less ancient, is the ook of
Leinster, said to have been compiled in the early part of the twelfth
century by Finn mac orman, ishop of ildare. This also contains an
account of uchulainns mighty deeds which supplements the older version
in the ook of the un ow. f somewhat less importance from the point
of view of the student of aelic mythology come the ook of allymote
and the Yellow ook of Lecan, belonging to the end of the fourteenth
century, and the ooks of Lecan and of Lismore, both attributed to the
fifteenth. esides these six great collections, there survive many other
manuscripts which also contain ancient mythical lore. In one of these,
dating from the fifteenth century, is to be found the story of the
attle of oytura, fought between the gods of Ireland and their enemies,
the Fomors, or demons of the deep sea.

The cottish manuscripts, preserved in the Advocates Library at
Edinburgh, date back in some cases as far as the fourteenth century,
though the maority of them belong to the fifteenth and sixteenth. They
corroborate the Irish documents, add to the uchulainn saga, and make a
more special subect of the other heroic cycle, that which relates the
not less wonderful deeds of Finn, ssian, and the Fenians. They also
contain stories of other characters, who, more ancient than either Finn
or uchulainn, are the Tuatha  anann, the godtribe of the ancient
aels.

The Welsh documents cover about the same period as the Irish and the
cottish. Four of these stand out from the rest, as most important. The
oldest is the lack ook of aermarthen, which dates from the third
uarter of the twelfth century the ook of Aneurin, which was written
late in the thirteenth the ook of Taliesin, assigned to the
fourteenth and the ed ook of ergest, compiled by various persons
during that century and the one following it. The first three of these
Four Ancient ooks of Wales are small in size, and contain poems
attributed to the great traditional bards of the sixth century, yrddin,
Taliesin, and Aneurin. The lastthe ed ook of ergestis far larger.
In it are to be found Welsh translations of the ritish hronicles the
oftmentioned Triads, verses celebrating famous traditionary persons or
things ancient poems attributed to Llywarch n and, of priceless
value to any study of our subect, the socalled abinogion, stories in
which large portions of the old ritish mythology are worked up into
romantic form.

The whole bulk, therefore, of the native literature bearing upon the
mythology of the ritish Islands may be attributed to a period which
lasted from the beginning of the twelfth century to the end of the
sixteenth. ut even the commencement of this era will no doubt seem far
too late a day to allow authenticity to matter which ought to have
vastly preceded it. The date, however, merely marks the final redaction
of the contents of the manuscripts into the form in which they now
exist, without bearing at all upon the time of their authorship.
Avowedly copies of ancient poems and tales from much older manuscripts,
the present books no more fix the period of the original composition of
their contents than the presence of a portion of the anterbury Tales
in a modern anthology of English poetry would assign haucer to the
present year of grace.

This may be proved both directly and inferentially. In some
instancesas in that of an elegy upon aint olumba in the ook of the
un owthe dates of authorship are actually given. In others, we may
depend upon evidence which, if not uite so absolute, is nearly as
convincing. Even where the writer does not state that he is copying from
older manuscripts, it is obvious that this must have been the case, from
the glosses in his version. The scribes of the earlier aelic
manuscripts very often found, in the documents from which they
themselves were copying, words so archaic as to be unintelligible to the
readers of their own period. To render them comprehensible, they were
obliged to insert marginal notes which explained these obsolete words by
reference to other manuscripts more ancient still. ften the medival
copyists have ignorantly moved these notes from the margin into the
text, where they remain, like philological fossils, to give evidence of
previous forms of life. The documents from which they were taken have
perished, leaving the medival copies as their sole record. In the Welsh
abinogion the same process is apparent. Peculiarities in the existing
manuscripts show plainly enough that they must have been copied from
some more archaic text. esides this, they are, as they at present
stand, obviously made up of earlier tales pieced together. Almost as
clearly as the aelic manuscripts, the Welsh point us back to older and
more primitive forms.

The ancient legends of the ael and the riton are thus shown to have
been no mere inventions of scholarly monks in the iddle Ages. We have
now to trace, if possible, the date, not necessarily of their first
appearance on mens lips, but of their first redaction into writing in
approximately the form in which we have them now.

ircumstantial evidence can be adduced to prove that the most important
portions both of aelic and ritish early literature can be safely
relegated to a period of several centuries prior to their nowexisting
record. ur earliest version of the episode of the Tin  huailgn,
which is the nucleus and centre of the ancient aelic heroic cycle of
which uchulainn, fortissimus heros cotorum, is the principal figure,
is found in the twelfthcentury ook of the un ow. ut legend tells us
that at the beginning of the seventh century the aga had not only been
composed, but had actually become so obsolete as to have been forgotten
by the bards. Their leader, one enchan Torpeist, a historical
character, and chief bard of Ireland at that time, obtained permission
from the aints to call Fergus, uchulainns contemporary, and a chief
actor in the aid, from the dead, and received from the resurrected
hero a true and full version. This tradition, dealing with a real
personage, surely shows that the story of the Tin was known before
the time of enchan, and probably preserves the fact, either that his
version of uchulainns famous deeds became the accepted one, or that he
was the first to reduce it to writing. An eually suggestive
consideration approximately fixes for us the earliest redaction of the
Welsh mythological prose tales called the abinogion, or, more
correctly speaking, the Four ranches of the abinogi. In none of
these is there the slightest mention, or apparently the least knowledge,
of Arthur, around whom and whose supposed contemporaries centres the
mass of ritish legend as it was transmitted by the Welsh to the
ormans. These mysterious mythological records must in all probability,
therefore, antedate the Arthurian cycle of myth, which was already being
put into form in the sixth century. n the other hand, the characters of
the Four ranches are mentioned without commentas though they were
personages with whom no one could fail to be familiarin the supposed
sixthcentury poems contained in those Four Ancient ooks of Wales in
which are found the first meagre references to the ritish hero.

uch considerations as these throw back, with reasonable certainty, the
existence of the Irish and Welsh poems and prose tales, in something
like their present shape, to a period antedating the seventh century.

ut this, again, means only that the myths, traditions, and legends were
current at that to us early, but to them, in their actual substance,
late date, in literary form. A mythology must always be far older than
the oldest verses and stories that celebrate it. Elaborate poems and
sagas are not made in a day, or in a year. The legends of the aelic and
ritish gods and heroes could not have sprung, like Athena from the head
of eus, fullborn out of some poets brain. The bard who first put them
into artistic shape was setting down the primitive traditions of his
race. We may therefore venture to describe them as not of the twelfth
century or of the seventh, but as of a prehistoric and immemorial
antiuity.

Internal evidence bears this out. An examination of both the aelic and
ritish legendary romances shows, under embellishing details added by
later hands, an inner core of primeval thought which brings them into
line with the similar ideas of other races in the earliest stage of
culture. Their local colour may be that of their last editor, but
their plots are premedival, prehristian, prehistoric. The
characters of early aelic legend belong to the same stamp of
imagination that created lympian and Titan, sir and tun. We must go
far to the back of civilized thought to find parallels to such a story
as that in which the ritish sungod, struck by a rival in love with a
poisoned spear, is turned into an eagle, from whose wound great pieces
of carrion are continually failing.

This aspect of the eltic literary records was clearly seen, and
elouently expressed, by atthew Arnold in his tudy of eltic
Literature. e was referring to the Welsh side, but his image holds
good eually for the aelic. The first thing that strikes one, he
says, in reading the abinogion is how evidently the medival
storyteller is pillaging an antiuity of which he does not fully
possess the secret he is like a peasant building his hut on the site of
alicarnassus or Ephesus he builds, but what he builds is full of
materials of which he knows not the history, or knows by a glimmering
tradition merely stones not of this building, but of an older
architecture, greater, cunninger, more maestical. is heroes are no
medival personages they belong to an older, pagan, mythological
world. o, too, with the figures, however euhemerized, of the three
great aelic cycles that of the Tuatha  anann, of the eroes of
lster, of Finn and the Fenians. Their divinity outshines their
humanity through their masks may be seen the faces of gods.

Yet, gods as they are, they had taken on the semblance of mortality by
the time their histories were fixed in the form in which we have them
now. Their earliest records, if those could be restored to us, would
doubtless show them eternal and undying, changing their shapes at will,
but not passing away. ut the posthristian copyists, whether Irish or
Welsh, would not countenance this. ence we have the singular paradox of
the deaths of Immortals. There is hardly one of the figures of either
the aelic or the ritish Pantheon whose demise is not somewhere
recorded. sually they fell in the unceasing battles between the
divinities of darkness and of light. Their deaths in earlier cycles of
myth, however, do not preclude their appearance in later ones. nly,
indeed, with the closing of the lips of the last mortal who preserved
his tradition can the life of a god be truly said to end.



Footnote 

  atisfactory summaries of the evidence for the dates of both the
  aelic and Welsh legendary material will be found in pamphlets o. 
  and  of r. utts Popular tudies in ythology, omance, and
  Folklore.

Footnote 

  hys tudies in the Arthurian Legend, chap. I.

Footnote 

  ee chap. I of this bookThe ods of the ritons.

Footnote 

  Lecture II.






                              APTE III

                    W WEE TE AIET IT


ut, before proceeding to recount the myths of the Ancient ritons, it
will be well to decide what people, exactly, we mean by that loose but
convenient phrase. We have, all of us, vague ideas of Ancient ritons,
recollected, doubtless, from our schoolbooks. There we saw their
pictures as, painted with woad, they paddled coracles, or drove scythed
chariots through legions of astonished omans. Their ruids,
whitebearded and wearing long, white robes, cut the mistletoe with a
golden sickle at the time of the full moon, or, less innocently
employed, made bonfires of human beings shut up in gigantic figures of
wickerwork.

uch picturesue details were little short of the sumtotal, not only of
our own knowledge of the subect, but also of that of our teachers.
Practically all their information concerning the ancient inhabitants of
ritain was taken from the ommentaries of ulius aesar. o far as it
went, it was no doubt correct but it did not go far. aesars interest
in our ritish ancestors was that of a general who was his own
warcorrespondent rather than that of an exhaustive and painstaking
scientist. It has been reserved for modern archologists, philologists,
and ethnologists to give us a fuller account of the Ancient ritons.

The inhabitants of our islands previous to the oman invasion are
generally described as elts. ut they must have been largely a mixed
race and the people with whom they mingled must have modified to
someand perhaps to a largeextent their physiue, their customs, and
their language.

peculation has run somewhat wild over the uestion of the composition
of the Early ritons. ut out of the clash of rival theories there
emerges oneand one onlywhich may be considered as scientifically
established. We have certain proof of two distinct human stocks in the
ritish Islands at the time of the oman onuest and so great an
authority as Professor uxley has given his opinion that there is no
evidence of any others.

The earliest of these two races would seem to have inhabited our islands
from the most ancient times, and may, for our purpose, be described as
aboriginal. It was the people that built the long barrows and which
is variously called by ethnologists the Iberian, editerranean, erber,
asue, ilurian, or Euskarian race. In physiue it was short, swarthy,
darkhaired, darkeyed, and longskulled its language belonged to the
class called amitic, the surviving types of which are found among the
allas, Abyssinians, erbers, and other orth African tribes and it
seems to have come originally from some part either of Eastern,
orthern, or entral Africa. preading thence, it was probably the first
people to inhabit the alley of the ile, and it sent offshoots into
yria and Asia inor. The earliest ellenes found it in reece under the
name of Pelasgoi the earliest Latins in Italy, as the Etruscans
and the ebrews in Palestine, as the ittites. It spread northward
through Europe as far as the altic, and westward, along the Atlas
chain, to pain, France, and our own islands. In many countries it
reached a comparatively high level of civilization, but in ritain its
development must have been early checked. We can discern it as an
agricultural rather than a pastoral people, still in the tone Age,
dwelling in totemistic tribes on hills whose summits it fortified
elaborately, and whose slopes it cultivated on what is called the
terrace system, and having a primitive culture which ethnologists
think to have much resembled that of the present hilltribes of outhern
India. It held our islands till the coming of the elts, who fought
with the aborigines, dispossessed them of the more fertile parts,
subugated them, even amalgamated with them, but certainly never
extirpated them. In the time of the omans they were still practically
independent in outh Wales. In Ireland they were long unconuered, and
are found as allies rather than serfs of the aels, ruling their own
provinces, and preserving their own customs and religion. or, in spite
of all the successive invasions of reat ritain and Ireland, are they
yet extinct, or so merged as to have lost their type, which is still the
predominant one in many parts of the west both of ritain and Ireland,
and is believed by some ethnologists to be generally upon the increase
all over England.

The second of the two races was the exact opposite to the first. It was
the tall, fair, lighthaired, blue or grayeyed, broadheaded people
called, popularly, the elts, who belonged in speech to the Aryan
family, their language finding its affinities in Latin, reek, Teutonic,
lavic, the end of Ancient Persia, and the anscrit of Ancient India.
Its original home was probably somewhere in entral Europe, along the
course of the upper anube, or in the region of the Alps. The round
barrows in which it buried its dead, or deposited their burnt ashes,
differ in shape from the long barrows of the earlier race. It was in a
higher stage of culture than the Iberians, and introduced into ritain
bronze and silver, and, perhaps, some of the more lately domesticated
animals.

oth Iberians and elts were divided into numerous tribes, but there is
nothing to show that there was any great diversity among the former. It
is otherwise with the elts, who were separated into two main branches
which came over at different times. The earliest were the oidels, or
aels the second, the rythons, or ritons. etween these two branches
there was not only a dialectical, but probably, also, a considerable
physical difference. ome anthropologists even postulate a different
shape of skull. Without necessarily admitting this, there is reason to
suppose a difference of build and of colour of hair. With regard to
this, we have the evidence of Latin writersof Tacitus, who tells us
that the aledonians of the orth differed from the outhern ritons
in being largerlimbed and redderhaired, and of trabo, who
described the tribes in the interior of ritain as taller than the
aulish colonists on the coast, with hair less yellow and limbs more
loosely knit. Eually do the classic authorities agree in recognizing
the ilures of outh Wales as an entirely different race from any
other in ritain. The dark complexions and curly hair of these Iberians
seemed to Tacitus to prove them immigrants from pain.

Professor hys also puts forward evidence to show that the oidels and
the rythons had already separated before they first left aul for our
islands. e finds them as two distinct peoples there. We do not
expect so much nowadays from the merest schoolboy as we did in
acaulays time, but even the modern descendant of that paragon could
probably tell us that all aul was divided into three parts, one of
which was inhabited by the elgae, another by the Auitani, and the
third by those who called themselves eltae, but were termed alli by
the omans and that they all differed from one another in language,
customs, and laws. f these, Professor hys identifies the elgae
with the rythons, and the eltae with the oidels, the third people,
the Auitani, being noneltic and nonAryan, part of the great
amiticspeaking Iberian stock. The eltae, with their oidelic
dialect of eltic, which survives today in the aelic languages of
Ireland, cotland, and the Isle of an, were the first to come over to
ritain, pushed forward, probably, by the elgae, who, aesar tells us,
were the bravest of the auls. ere they conuered the native
Iberians, driving them out of the fertile parts into the rugged
districts of the north and west. Later came the elgae themselves,
compelled by press of population and they, bringing better weapons and
a higher civilization, treated the oidels as those had treated the
Iberians. Thus harried, the oidels probably combined with the Iberians
against what was now the common foe, and became to a large degree
amalgamated with them. The result was that during the oman domination
the ritish Islands were roughly divided with regard to race as follows
The rythons, or second eltic race, held all ritain south of the
Tweed, with the exception of the extreme west, while the first eltic
race, the oidelic, had most of Ireland, as well as the Isle of an,
umberland, the West ighlands, ornwall, evon, and orth Wales. orth
of the rampians lived the Picts, who were probably more or less
oidelicized Iberians, the aboriginal race also holding out, unmixed, in
outh Wales and parts of Ireland.

It is now time to decide what, for the purposes of this book, it will be
best to call the two different branches of the elts, and their
languages. With such familiar terms as ael and riton, aelic and
ritish, ready to our hands, it seems pedantic to insist upon the more
technical oidel and rython, oidelic and rythonic. The
difficulty is that the words ael and aelic have been so long
popularly used to designate only the modern oidels of cotland and
their language, that they may create confusion when also applied to the
people and languages of Ireland and the Isle of an. imilarly, the
words riton and ritish have come to mean, at the present day, the
people of the whole of the ritish Islands, though they at first only
signified the inhabitants of England, entral Wales, the Lowlands of
cotland, and the rythonic colony in rittany. owever, the words
oidel and rython, with their derivatives, are so clumsy that it
will probably prove best to use the neater terms. In this volume,
therefore, the oidels of Ireland, cotland, and the Isle of an are
our aels and the rythons of England and Wales are our ritons.

We get the earliest accounts of the life of the inhabitants of the
ritish Islands from two sources. The first is a foreign one, that of
the Latin writers. ut the omans only really knew the outhern ritons,
whom they describe as similar in physiue and customs to the ontinental
auls, with whom, indeed, they considered them to be identical. At
the time they wrote, colonies of elgae were still settling upon the
coasts of ritain opposite to aul. oman information grew scantier
as it approached the Wall, and of the orthern tribes they seem to have
had only such knowledge as they gathered through occasional warfare with
them. They describe them as entirely barbarous, naked and tattooed,
living by the chase alone, without towns, houses, or fields, without
government or family life, and regarding iron as an ornament of value,
as other, more civilized peoples regarded gold. As for Ireland, it
never came under their direct observation, and we are entirely dependent
upon its native writers for information as to the manners and customs of
the aels. It may be considered convincing proof of the authenticity of
the descriptions of life contained in the ancient aelic manuscripts
that they corroborate so completely the observations of the Latin
writers upon the ritons and auls. eading the two side by side, we may
largely reconstruct the common civilization of the elts.

oughly speaking, one may compare it with the civilization of the
reeks, as described by omer. oth peoples were in the tribal and
pastoral stage of culture, in which the chiefs are the great
cattleowners round whom their less wealthy fellows gather. oth wear
much the same attire, use the same kind of weapons, and fight in the
same mannerfrom the warchariot, a vehicle already obsolete even in
Ireland by the first century of the hristian era. attles are fought
singlehanded between chiefs, the illarmed common people contributing
little to their result, and less to their history. uch chiefs are said
to be divinely descendedsons, even, of the immortal gods. Their
tremendous feats are sung by the bards, who, like the omeric poets,
were privileged persons, inferior only to the warlord. Ancient reek
and Ancient elt had very much the same conceptions of life, both as
regards this world and the next.

We may gather much detailed information of the early inhabitants of the
ritish Islands from our various authorities. Their clothes, which
consisted, according to the Latin writers, of a blouse with sleeves,
trousers fitting closely round the ankles, and a shawl or cloak,
fastened at the shoulder with a brooch, were made either of thick felt
or of woven cloth dyed with various brilliant colours. The writer
iodorus tells us that they were crossed with little suares and lines,
as though they had been sprinkled with flowers. They were, in fact,
like tartans, and we may believe arro, who tells us that they made a
gaudy show. The men alone seem to have worn hats, which were of soft
felt, the womens hair being uncovered, and tied in a knot behind. In
time of battle, the men also dispensed with any headcovering, brushing
their abundant hair forward into a thick mass, and dyeing it red with a
soap made of goats fat and beech ashes, until they looked says
iceros tutor Posidonius, who visited ritain about  .. less like
human beings than wild men of the woods. oth sexes were fond of
ornaments, which took the form of gold bracelets, rings, pins, and
brooches, and of beads of amber, glass, and et. Their knives, daggers,
spearheads, axes, and swords were made of bronze or iron their shields
were the same round target used by the ighlanders at the battle of
ulloden and they seem also to have had a kind of lasso to which a
hammershaped ball was attached, and which they used as the auchos of
outh America use their bola. Their warchariots were made of wicker,
the wooden wheels being armed with sickles of bronze. These were drawn
either by two or four horses, and were large enough to hold several
persons in each. tanding in these, they rushed along the enemys lines,
hurling darts, and driving the scythes against all who came within
reach. The omans were much impressed by the skill of the drivers, who
could check their horses at full speed on a steep incline, and turn
them in an instant, and could run along the pole, and stand on the yoke,
and then get back into their chariots again without a moments
delay.

With these accounts of the oman writers we may compare the picture of
the aelic hero, uchulainn, as the ancient Irish writers describe him
dressed and armed for battle. lorified by the bard, he yet wears
essentially the same costume and euipment which the classic historians
and geographers described more soberly. is gorgeous raiment that he
wore in great conventions consisted of a fair crimson tunic of five
plies and fringed, with a long pin of white silver, goldenchased and
patterned, shining as if it had been a luminous torch which for its
blazing property and brilliance men might not endure to see. ext his
skin, a bodyvest of silk, bordered and fringed all round with gold,
with silver, and with white bronze, which vest came as far as the upper
edge of his russetcoloured kilt.... About his neck were a hundred
linklets of red gold that flashed again, with pendants hanging from
them. is headgear was adorned with a hundred mixed carbuncle ewels,
strung. e carried a trusty special shield, in hue dark crimson, and
in its circumference armed with a pure white silver rim. At his left
side a long and goldenhilted sword. eside him, in the chariot, a
lengthy spear together with a keen, aggressionboding avelin, fitted
with hurling thong, with rivets of white bronze. Another passage of
aelic saga describes his chariot. It was made of fine wood, with
wickerwork, moving on wheels of white bronze. It had a high rounded
frame of creaking copper, a strong curved yoke of gold, and a pole of
white silver, with mountings of white bronze. The yellow reins were
plaited, and the shafts were as hard and straight as swordblades.

In like manner the ancient Irish writers have made glorious the halls
and fortresses of their mythical kings. Like the palaces of Priam, of
enelaus, and of dysseus, they gleam with gold and gems. onchobar,
the legendary ing of lster in its golden age, had three such houses
at Emain acha. f the one called the ed ranch, we are told that it
contained nine compartments of red yew, partitioned by walls of bronze,
all grouped around the kings private chamber, which had a ceiling of
silver, and bronze pillars adorned with gold and carbuncles. ut the
far less magnificent accounts of the Latin writers have, no doubt, more
truth in them than such lavish pictures. They described the ritons they
knew as living in villages of beehive huts, roofed with fern or thatch,
from which, at the approach of an enemy, they retired to the local
dn. This, so far from being elaborate, merely consisted of a round or
oval space fenced in with palisades and earthworks, and situated either
upon the top of a hill or in the midst of a not easily traversable
morass. We may see the remains of such strongholds in many parts of
Englandnotable ones are the castles of Amesbury, Avebury, and ld
arum in Wiltshire, aint atherines ill, near Winchester, and aint
eorges ill, in urreyand it is probable that, in spite of the eltic
praisers of past days, the palaces of Emain acha and of Tara were
very like them.

The eltic customs were, like the omeric, those of the primitive world.
All land though it may have theoretically belonged to the chief was
cultivated in common. This community of possessions is stated by
aesar to have extended to their wives but the imputation cannot be
said to have been proved. n the contrary, in the stories of both
branches of the eltic race, women seem to have taken a higher place in
mens estimation, and to have enoyed far more personal liberty, than
among the omeric reeks. The idea may have arisen from a
misunderstanding of some of the curious eltic customs. escent seems to
have been traced through the maternal rather than through the paternal
line, a very unAryan procedure which some believe to have been borrowed
from another race. The parental relation was still further lessened by
the custom of sending children to be brought up outside the family in
which they were born, so that they had fosterparents to whom they were
as much, or even more, attached than to their natural ones.

Their political state, mirroring their family life, was not less
primitive. There was no central tribunal. isputes were settled within
the families in which they occurred, while, in the case of graver
inuries, the inured party or his nearest relation could kill the
culprit or exact a fine from him. As families increased in number, they
became petty tribes, often at war with one another. A defeated tribe had
to recognize the sovereignty of the head man of the conuering tribe,
and a succession of such victories exalted him into the position of a
chief of his district. ut even then, though his decision was the whole
of the law, he was little more than the mouthpiece of public opinion.



Footnote 

  uxley n ome Fixed Points in ritish Ethnology. .

Footnote 

  ergi The editerranean ace.

Footnote 

  omme The illage ommunity. hap. IThe nonAryan Elements in
  the English illage ommunity.

Footnote 

  Tacitus Agricola, chap. I.

Footnote 

  trabo eographica, ook I, chap. .

Footnote 

  Tacitus, op. cit.

Footnote 

  hys The Early Ethnology of the ritish Islands. cottish eview.
  April, .

Footnote 

  aesar e ello allico, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  hys cottish eview. April, .

Footnote 

  p. aesar, op. cit.

Footnote 

  Tacitus Agricola, chap. I.

Footnote 

  aesar e ello allico, ook , chap. II.

Footnote 

  Elton rigins of English istory, chap. II.

Footnote 

  ee La ivilisation des eltes et celle de lpope omriue, by
  . dArbois de ubainville, ours de Littrature eltiue, ol. I.

Footnote 

  ee Elton rigins of English istory, chap. II.

Footnote 

  aesar e ello allico, ook I, chap. III.

Footnote 

  From the Tin  huailgn. The translator is r. tandish ayes
  rady.

Footnote 

  Tochmarc Emirethe Wooing of Emeran old Irish romance.

Footnote 

  ometimes spelt onachar, and pronounced onhower or onnor.

Footnote 

  The Wooing of Emer.

Footnote 

  aesar e ello allico, ook , chap. I, and various passages in
  ook II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., chap. I.






                               APTE I

                TE ELII F TE AIET IT A
                                II


The ancient inhabitants of ritainthe aelic and ritish eltshave
been already described as forming a branch of what are roughly called
the Aryans. This name has, however, little reference to race, and
really signifies the speakers of a group of languages which can be all
shown to be connected, and to descend remotely from a single sourcea
hypothetical mothertongue spoken by a hypothetical people which we term
Aryan, or, more correctly, IndoEuropean. This primeval speech,
evolved, probably, upon some part of the great plain which stretches
from the mountains of entral Europe to the mountains of entral Asia,
has spread, superseding, or amalgamating with the tongues of other
races, until branches of it are spoken over almost the whole of Europe
and a great portion of Asia. All the various Latin, reek, lavic,
Teutonic, and eltic languages are Aryan, as well as Persian and other
Asiatic dialects derived from the ancient end, and the numerous
Indian languages which trace their origin to anscrit.

ot very long ago, it was supposed that this common descent of language
involved a common descent of blood. A real brotherhood was
enthusiastically claimed for all the principal European nations, who
were also invited to recognize indus and Persians as their longlost
cousins. ince then, it has been conceded that, while the Aryan speech
survived, though greatly modified, the Aryan blood might well have
disappeared, diluted beyond recognition by crossing with the other races
whom the Aryans conuered, or among whom they more or less peacefully
settled. As a matter of fact, there are no European nationsperhaps no
people at all except a few remote savage tribeswhich are not made up of
the most diverse elements. Aryan and nonAryan long ago blended
inextricably, to form by their fusion new peoples.

ut, ust as the Aryan speech influenced the new languages, and the
Aryan customs the new civilizations, so we can still discern in the
religions of the Aryanspeaking nations similar ideas and expressions
pointing to an original source of mythological conceptions. ence,
whether we investigate the mythology of the indus, the reeks, the
Teutons, or the elts, we find the same mythological groundwork. In
each, we see the powers of nature personified, and endowed with human
form and attributes, though bearing, with few exceptions, different
names. Like the edic brahmans, the reek and Latin poets, and the orse
scalds, the eltic bardswhether aels or ritonsimagined the sky, the
sun, the moon, the earth, the sea, and the dark underworld, as well as
the mountains, the streams and the woods, to be ruled by beings like
their own chiefs, but infinitely more powerful every passion, as War
and Love, and every art, as Poetry and mithcraft, had its divine
founder, teacher, and exponent and of all these deities and their
imagined children, they wove the poetical and allegorical romances which
form the subect of the present volume.

Like other nations, too, whether Aryan or nonAryan, the elts had,
besides their mythology, a religion. It is not enough to tell tales of
shadowy gods they must be made visible by sculpture, housed in groves
or temples, served with ritual, and propitiated with sacrifices, if one
is to hope for their favours. Every cult must have its priests living by
the altar.

The priests of the elts are wellknown to us by name as the ruidsa
word derived from a root  which signifies a tree, and especially the
oak, in several Aryan languages. This is generallythough not by all
scholarstaken as proving that they paid an especial veneration to the
king of trees. It is true that the mistletoethat strange parasite upon
the oakwas prominent among their herbs of power, and played a part in
their ritual but this is eually true of other Aryan nations. y
the orse it was held sacred to the god alder, while the omans
believed it to be the golden bough that gave access to ades.

The accounts both of the Latin and aelic writers give us a fairly
complete idea of the nature of the ruids, and especially of the high
estimation in which they were held. They were at once the priests, the
physicians, the wizards, the diviners, the theologians, the scientists,
and the historians of their tribes. All spiritual power and all human
knowledge were vested in them, and they ranked second only to the kings
and chiefs. They were freed from all contribution to the tate, whether
by tribute or service in war, so that they might the better apply
themselves to their divine offices. Their decisions were absolutely
final, and those who disobeyed them were laid under a terrible
excommunication or boycott. lassic writers tell us how they
lorded it in aul, where, no doubt, they borrowed splendour by imitating
their more civilized neighbours. en of the highest rank were proud to
cast aside the insignia of mere mortal honour to oin the company of
those who claimed to be the direct mediators with the skygod and the
thundergod, and who must have resembled the ecclesiastics of medival
Europe in the days of their greatest power, combining, like them,
spiritual and temporal dignities, and possessing the highest culture of
their age. Yet it was not among these ruids of aul, with their
splendid temples and vestments and their elaborate rituals, that the
metropolis of ruidism was to be sought. We learn from aesar that the
allic ruids believed their religion to have come to them, originally,
from ritain, and that it was their practice to send their theological
students across the hannel to learn its doctrines at their purest
source. To trace a cult backwards is often to take a retrograde
course in culture, and it was no doubt in ritainwhich Pliny the Elder
tells us might have taught magic to Persiathat the sufficiently
primitive and savage rites of the ruids of aul were preserved in their
still more savage and primitive forms. It is curious corroboration of
this alleged ritish origin of ruidism that the ancient Irish also
believed their ruidism to have come from the sister island. Their
heroes and seers are described as only gaining the highest knowledge by
travelling to Alba. owever this may be, we may take it as certain
that this ruidism was the accepted religion of the eltic race.

ertain scholars look deeper for its origin, holding its dark
superstitions and savage rites to bear the stamp of lower minds than
those of the poetic and manly elts. Professor hys inclines to see
three forms of religion in the ritish Islands at the time of the oman
invasion the ruidism of the Iberian aborigines the pure polytheism
of the rythons, who, having come later into the country, had mixed but
little with the natives and the mingled Aryan and nonAryan cults of
the oidels, who were already largely amalgamated with them. ut
many authorities dissent from this view, and, indeed, we are not obliged
to postulate borrowing from tribes in a lower state of culture, to
explain primitive and savage features underlying a higher religion. The
Aryan nations must have passed, eually with all others, through a
state of pure savagery and we know that the religion of the reeks, in
many respects so lofty, sheltered features and legends as barbarous as
any that can be attributed to the elts.

f the famous teaching of the ruids we know little, owing to their
habit of never allowing their doctrines to be put into writing. aesar,
however, roughly records its scope. As one of their leading dogmas, he
says, they inculcate this that souls are not annihilated, but pass
after death from one body to another, and they hold that by this
teaching men are much encouraged to valour, through disregarding the
fear of death. They also discuss and impart to the young many things
concerning the heavenly bodies and their movements, the size of the
world and of our earth, natural science, and of the influence and power
of the immortal gods. The omans seem to have held their wisdom in
some awe, though it is not unlikely that the ruids themselves borrowed
whatever knowledge they may have had of science and philosophy from the
classical culture. That their creed of transmigration was not, however,
merely taken over from the reeks seems certain from its appearance in
the ancient aelic myths. ot only the shapeshifting common to the
magic stories of all nations, but actual reincarnation was in the power
of privileged beings. The hero uchulainn was urged by the men of lster
to marry, because they knew that his rebirth would be of himself,
and they did not wish so great a warrior to be lost to their tribe.
Another legend tells how the famous Finn mac oul was reborn, after two
hundred years, as an lster king called ongan.

uch ideas, however, belonged to the metaphysical side of ruidism. Far
more important to the practical primitive mind are ritual and sacrifice,
by the due performance of which the gods are persuaded or compelled to
grant earths increase and length of days to men. Among the ruids, this
humouring of the divinities took the shape of human sacrifice, and that
upon a scale which would seem to have been unsurpassed in horror even by
the most savage tribes of West Africa or Polynesia. The whole aulish
nation, says aesar, is to a great degree devoted to superstitious
rites and on this account those who are afflicted with severe diseases,
or who are engaged in battles and dangers, either sacrifice human beings
for victims, or vow that they will immolate themselves, and these employ
the ruids as ministers for such sacrifices, because they think that,
unless the life of man be repaid for the life of man, the will of the
immortal gods cannot be appeased. They also ordain national offerings of
the same kind. thers make wickerwork images of vast size, the limbs of
which they fill with living men and set on fire.

We find evidence of similarly awful customs in pagan Ireland. Among the
oldest aelic records are tracts called innsenchus, in which famous
places are enumerated, together with the legends relating to them. uch
topographies are found in several of the great Irish medival
manuscripts, and therefore, of course, received their final
transcription at the hands of hristian monks. ut these ecclesiastics
rarely tampered with compositions in elaborate verse. or can it be
imagined that any monastic scribe could have invented such a legend as
this one which describes the practice of human sacrifice among the
ancient Irish. The poem which is found in the ooks of Leinster, of
allymote, of Lecan, and in a document called the ennes .
records the reason why a spot near the present village of allymagauran,
in ounty avan, received the name of ag lecht, the Plain of
Adoration.

        ere used to be
         A high idol with many fights,
         Which was named the romm ruaich
         It made every tribe to be without peace.

        Twas a sad evil
         rave aels used to worship it.
         From it they would not without tribute ask
         To be satisfied as to their portion of the hard world.

        e was their god,
         The withered romm with many mists,
         The people whom he shook over every host,
         The everlasting kingdom they shall not have.

        To him without glory
         They would kill their piteous, wretched offspring
         With much wailing and peril,
         To pour their blood around romm ruaich.

        ilk and corn
         They would ask from him speedily
         In return for onethird of their healthy issue
         reat was the horror and the scare of him.

        To him
         oble aels would prostrate themselves,
         From the worship of him, with many manslaughters,
         The plain is called ag lecht.

                                                

        They did evil,
         They beat their palms, they pounded their bodies,
         Wailing to the demon who enslaved them,
         They shed falling showers of tears.

                                                

        Around romm ruaich
         There the hosts would prostrate themselves
         Though he put them under deadly disgrace,
         Their name clings to the noble plain.

        In their ranks stood
         Four times three stone idols
         To bitterly beguile the hosts,
         The figure of the romm was made of gold.

        ince the rule
         f erimon, the noble man of grace,
         There was worshipping of stones
         ntil the coming of good Patrick of acha.

        A sledgehammer to the romm
         e applied from crown to sole,
         e destroyed without lack of valour
         The feeble idol which was there.

uch, we gather from a tradition which we may deem authentic, was human
sacrifice in early Ireland. According to the uoted verse, one third of
the healthy children were slaughtered, presumably every year, to wrest
from the powers of nature the grain and grass upon which the tribes and
their cattle subsisted. In a prose dinnsenchus preserved in the ennes
., there is a slight variant. Tis there, at ag lecht, it
runs, was the king idol of Erin, namely the rom roich, and around him
were twelve idols made of stones, but he was of gold. ntil Patricks
advent he was the god of every folk that colonized Ireland. To him they
used to offer the firstlings of every issue and the chief scions of
every clan. The same authority also tells us that these sacrifices were
made at alloween, which took the place, in the hristian calendar,
of the heathen amhainummers Endwhen the suns power waned, and
the strength of the gods of darkness, winter, and the underworld grew
great.

Who, then, was this bloodthirsty deity is name, romm ruaich, means
the owed ne of the ound, and was evidently applied to him only
after his fall from godhead. It relates to the tradition that, at the
approach of the allconuering aint Patrick, the demon fled from his
golden image, which thereupon sank forward in the earth in homage to the
power that had come to supersede it. ut from another source we
glean that the word cromm was a kind of pun upon cenn, and that the
real title of the king idol of Erin was enn ruaich, ead or
Lord of the ound. Professor hys, in his eltic eathendom,
suggests that he was probably the aelic heavengod, worshipped, like
the ellenic eus, upon high places, natural or artificial. At any
rate, we may see in him the god most revered by the aels, surrounded by
the other twelve chief members of their Pantheon.

It would appear probable that the eltic tate worship was what is
called solar. All its chief festivals related to points in the suns
progress, the euinoxes having been considered more important than the
solstices. It was at the spring euinox called by the elts
eltaine in every nineteenth year that, we learn from iodorus
the icilian, a writer contemporary with ulius aesar, Apollo himself
appeared to his worshippers, and was seen harping and dancing in the sky
until the rising of the Pleiades. The other corresponding festival
was amhain, the autumn euinox. As eltaine marked the beginning
of summer, so amhain recorded its end. The summer solstice was also a
great eltic feast. It was held at the beginning of August in honour of
the god called Lugus by the auls, Lugh by the aels, and Lleu by the
ritonsthe paneltic Apollo, and, probably, when the cult of the
wargod had fallen from its early prominence, the chief figure of the
common Pantheon.

It was doubtless at tonehenge that the ritish Apollo was thus seen
harping and dancing. That marvellous structure well corresponds to
iodoruss description of a magnificent temple of Apollo which he
locates in the centre of ritain. It is a circular enclosure, he
says, adorned with votive offerings and tablets with reek inscriptions
suspended by travellers upon the walls. The rulers of the temple and
city are called oread, and they take up the government from each
other according to the order of their tribes. The citizens are given up
to music, harping and chanting in honour of the sun. tonehenge,
therefore, was a sacred religious centre, eually revered by and eually
belonging to all the ritish tribesa ome or erusalem of our ancient
paganism.

The same great gods were, no doubt, adored by all the elts, not only of
reat ritain and Ireland, but of ontinental aul as well. ometimes
they can be traced by name right across the ancient eltic world. In
other cases, what is obviously the same personified power of nature is
found in various places with the same attributes, but with a different
title. esides these, there must have been a multitude of lesser gods,
worshipped by certain tribes alone, to whom they stood as ancestors and
guardians. I swear by the gods of my people, was the ordinary oath of
a hero in the ancient aelic sagas. The aboriginal tribes must also have
had their gods, whether it be true or not that their religion influenced
the eltic ruidism. Professor hys inclines to see in the genii
locorum, the almost nameless spirits of well and river, mountain and
woodshadowy remnants of whose cults survive today,members of a
swarming Pantheon of the older Iberians. These local beings would in
no way conflict with the great eltic naturegods, and the two worships
could exist side by side, both even claiming the same votary. It needs
the stern faith of monotheism to deny the existence of the gods of
others. Polytheistic nations have seldom or never risen to such a
height. In their dealings with a conuered people, the conuerors
naturally held their own gods to be the stronger. till, it could not be
denied that the gods of the conuered were upon their own ground they
knew, so to speak, the country, and might have unguessed powers of doing
evil What if, to avenge their worshippers and themselves, they were to
make the land barren and useless to the conuerors o that conuering
pagan nations have usually been uite ready to stretch out the hand of
welcome to the deities of their new subects, to propitiate them by
sacrifice, and even to admit them within the pale of their own Pantheon.

This raises the uestion of the exact nationality of the gods whose
stories we are about to tell. Were they all Aryan, or did any of the
greater aboriginal deities climb up to take their place among the aelic
tribe of the goddess anu, or the ritish children of the goddess n
ome of the eltic gods have seemed to scholars to bear signs of a
nonAryan origin. The point, however, is at present very obscure.
either does it much concern us. ust as the diverse deities of the
reekssome Aryan and ellenic, some preAryan and Pelasgian, some
imported and emiticwere all gathered into one great divine family, so
we may consider as members of one national lympus all these gods whose
legends make up The ythology of the ritish Islands.



Footnote 

  ee chrader Prehistoric Antiuities of the Aryan Peoples, pp. ,
  .

Footnote 

  A description of the ruidical cult of the mistletoe is given by
  Pliny atural istory, I, chap. .

Footnote 

  ee Frazer The olden ough, chap. I.

Footnote 

  aesar e ello allico, ook I, chaps. III, I. ut for a full
  exposition of what is known of the ruids the reader is referred to .
  dArbois de ubainvilles Introduction  ltude de la Littrature
  eltiue, ol. I of his ours de Littrature eltiue.

Footnote 

  aesar e ello allico, ook I, chap. III.

Footnote 

  Pliny atural istory, .

Footnote 

  ee chap. II, The Irish Iliad.

Footnote 

  hys eltic ritain, chap. II. ee also omme Ethnology in
  Folklore, pp.  illage ommunity, p. .

Footnote 

  Abundant evidence of this is contained in Pausanias escription of
  reece.

Footnote 

  aesar e ello allico, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  The Wooing of Emer.

Footnote 

  It is contained in the ook of the un ow, and has been translated or
  commented upon by Eugene urry anners and ustoms of the Ancient
  Irish, e ubainville ycle ythologiue Irlandais, and utt
  oyage of ran.

Footnote 

  aesar e ello allico, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  The following translation was made by r. uno eyer, and appears as
  Appendix  to utts oyage of ran. Three verses, here omitted,
  will be found later as a note to chap. IIThe Irish Iliad.

Footnote 

  The first ing of the ilesians. The name is more usually spelt
  Eremon.

Footnote 

  The ennes innsenchus has been translated by r. Whitley tokes in
  ol. I of the evue eltiue.

Footnote 

  Told in the Tripartite Life of aint Patrick, a fifteenthcentury
  combination of three very ancient aelic .

Footnote 

  The ibbert Lectures for . Lecture IIThe eus of the Insular
  elts.

Footnote 

  Pronounced altinna.

Footnote 

  iodorus iculus ook II, chap. III.

Footnote 

  Pronounced owin.

Footnote 

  It has been suggested that this title is an attempt to reproduce the
  ancient ritish word for bards.

Footnote 

  iodorus iculus ook II, chap. III.

Footnote 

  ibbert Lectures, . Lecture IThe aulish Pantheon.

Footnote 

  ee hys Lectures on Welsh Philology, pp. , , .






                       TE AELI  A TEI
                                TIE









                               APTE 

                         TE  F TE AEL


f the two eltic races that settled in our islands, it is the earlier,
the aels, that has best preserved its old mythology. It is true that we
have in few cases such detailed account of the aelic gods as we gain of
the ellenic deities from the reek poets, of the Indian evas from the
ig eda, or of the orse sir from the Eddas. Yet none the less may we
draw from the ancient Irish manuscripts uite enough information to
enable us to set forth their figures with some clearness. We find them,
as might have been anticipated, very much like the divine hierarchies of
other Aryan peoples.

We also find them separated into two opposing camps, a division common
to all the Aryan religions. ust as the lympians struggled with the
iants, the sir fought the tuns, and the evas the Asuras, so there
is warfare in the aelic spiritual world between two superhuman hosts.
n one side are ranged the gods of day, light, life, fertility, wisdom,
and good on the other, the demons of night, darkness, death,
barrenness, and evil. The first were the great spirits symbolizing the
beneficial aspects of nature and the arts and intelligence of man the
second were the hostile powers thought to be behind such baneful
manifestations as storm and fog, drought and disease. The first are
ranged as a divine family round a goddess called anu, from whom they
took their wellknown name of Tuatha  anann, Tribe or Folk
of the oddess anu. The second owned allegiance to a female divinity
called omnu their king, Indech, is described as her son, and they are
all called omnus gods. The word omnu appears to have signified
the abyss or the deep sea, and the same idea is also expressed in
their betterknown name of Fomors, derived from two aelic words
meaning under sea. The waste of water seems to have always
impressed the elts with the sense of primeval ancientness it was
connected in their minds with vastness, darkness, and monstrous
birthsthe very antithesis of all that was symbolized by the earth, the
sky, and the sun.

Therefore the Fomors were held to be more ancient than the gods, before
whom they were, however, destined to fall in the end. ffspring of
haos and ld ight, they were, for the most part, huge and deformed.
ome had but one arm and one leg apiece, while others had the heads of
goats, horses, or bulls. The most famous, and perhaps the most
terrible of them all was alor, whose father is said to have been one
uarainech, that is, the cowfaced, and who combined in himself
the two classical rles of the yclops and the edusa. Though he had two
eyes, one was always kept shut, for it was so venomous that it slew
anyone on whom its look fell. This malignant uality of alors eye was
not natural to him, but was the result of an accident. rged by
curiosity, he once looked in at the window of a house where his fathers
sorcerers were preparing a magic potion, and the poisonous smoke from
the cauldron reached his eye, infecting it with so much of its own
deadly nature as to make it disastrous to others. either god nor giant
seems to have been exempt from its dangers so that alor was only
allowed to live on condition that he kept his terrible eye shut. n days
of battle he was placed opposite to the enemy, the lid of the destroying
eye was lifted up with a hook, and its gaze withered all who stood
before it. The memory of alor and his eye still lingers in Ireland the
eye of alor is the name for what the peasantry of other countries
call the evil eye stories are still told of alar eimann, or
alor of the ighty lows and alors astle is the name of a
curious cliff on Tory Island. This island, off the coast of onegal, was
the Fomorian outpost upon earth, their real abode being in the cold
depths of the sea.

This rule, however, as to the hideousness of the Fomors had its
exceptions. Elathan, one of their chiefs, is described in an old
manuscript as of magnificent presencea iltonic prince of darkness. A
man of fairest form, it says, with golden hair down to his shoulders.
e wore a mantle of gold braid over a shirt interwoven with threads of
gold. Five golden necklaces were round his neck, and a brooch of gold
with a shining precious stone thereon was on his breast. e carried two
silver spears with rivets of bronze, and his sword was goldenhilted and
goldenstudded. or was his son less handsome. is name was ress,
which means beautiful, and we are told that every beautiful thing in
Ireland, whether plain, or fortress, or ale, or torch, or woman, or
man, was compared with him, so that men said of them, that is a
ress.

alor, ress, and Elathan are the three Fomorian personages whose
figures, seen through the mists of antiuity, show clearest to us. ut
they are only a few out of many, nor are they the oldest. We can learn,
however, nothing but a few names of any ancestors of the aelic giants.
This is eually true of the aelic gods. Those we know are evidently not
without parentage, but the names of their fathers are no more than
shadows following into oblivion the figures they designated. The most
ancient divinity of whom we have any knowledge is anu herself, the
goddess from whom the whole hierarchy of gods received its name of
Tuatha  anann. he was also called Anu or Ana, and her name still
clings to two wellknown mountains near illarney, which, though now
called simply The Paps, were known formerly as the Paps of Ana.
he was the universal mother well she used to cherish the gods, says
the commentator of a ninthcentury Irish glossary. er husband is
never mentioned by name, but one may assume him, from ritish analogies,
to have been il, known to aelic tradition as a god of ades, a kind
of eltic is Pater from whom sprang the first men. anu herself
probably represented the earth and its fruitfulness, and one might
compare her with the reek emeter. All the other gods are, at least by
title, her children. The greatest of these would seem to have been
uada, called Argetlm, or e of the ilver and. e was at once the
aelic eus, or upiter, and their wargod for among primitive nations,
to whom success in war is allimportant, the god of battles is the
supreme god. Among the auls, amulus, whose name meant
eaven, was identified by the omans with ars and other such
instances come readily to the mind. e was possessed of an invincible
sword, one of the four chief treasures of the Tuatha  anann, over
whom he was twice king and there is little doubt that he was one of the
most important gods of both the aels and the ritons, for his name is
spread over the whole of the ritish Isles, which we may surmise the
elts conuered under his auspices. We may picture him as a more savage
ars, delighting in battle and slaughter, and worshipped, like his
aulish affinities, Teutates and esus, of whom the Latin poet Lucan
tells us, with human sacrifices, shared in by his female consorts, who,
we may imagine, were not more merciful than himself, or than that
aulish Taranis whose cult was no gentler than that of the cythian
iana, and who completes Lucans triad as a fit companion to the
pitiless Teutates and the horrible esus. f these warlike
goddesses there were fiveFea, the ateful, emon, the enomous,
adb, the Fury, acha, a personification of battle, and, over all of
them, the orrg, or reat ueen. This supreme wargoddess of the
aels, who resembles a fiercer er, perhaps symbolized the moon, deemed
by early races to have preceded the sun, and worshipped with magical and
cruel rites. he is represented as going fully armed, and carrying two
spears in her hand. As with Ars and Poseidon in the Iliad,
her battlecry was as loud as that of ten thousand men. Wherever there
was war, either among gods or men, she, the great ueen, was present,
either in her own shape or in her favourite disguise, that of a hoodie
or carrion crow. An old poem shows her inciting a warrior

              ver his head is shrieking
                 A lean hag, uickly hopping
               ver the points of the weapons and shields
                 he is the grayhaired orrg.

With her, Fea and emon, adb and acha also hovered over the fighters,
inspiring them with the madness of battle. All of these were sometimes
called by the name of adb. An account of the attle of lontarf,
fought by rian oru, in , against the orsemen, gives a gruesome
picture of what the aels believed to happen in the spiritual world when
battle lowered and mens blood was aflame. There arose a wild,
impetuous, precipitate, mad, inexorable, furious, dark, lacerating,
merciless, combative, contentious badb, which was shrieking and
fluttering over their heads. And there arose also the satyrs, and
sprites, and the maniacs of the valleys, and the witches and goblins and
owls, and destroying demons of the air and firmament, and the demoniac
phantom host and they were inciting and sustaining valour and battle
with them. When the fight was over, they revelled among the bodies of
the slain the heads cut off as barbaric trophies were called achas
acorn crop. These grim creations of the savage mind had immense
vitality. While uada, the supreme wargod, vanished early out of the
Pantheonkilled by the Fomors in the great battle fought between them
and the godsadb and the orrg lived on as late as any of the aelic
deities. Indeed, they may be said to still survive in the superstitious
dislike and suspicion shown in all elticspeaking countries for their
avatar, the hoodiecrow.

After uada, the greatest of the gods was the agda, whose name seems to
have meant the ood od. The old Irish tract called The hoice of
ames tells us that he was a god of the earth he had a cauldron called
The ndry, in which everyone found food in proportion to his merits,
and from which none went away unsatisfied. e also had a living harp as
he played upon it, the seasons came in their orderspring following
winter, and summer succeeding spring, autumn coming after summer, and,
in its turn, giving place to winter. e is represented as of venerable
aspect and of simple mind and tastes, very fond of porridge, and a
valiant consumer of it. In an ancient tale we have a description of his
dress. e wore a brown, lownecked tunic which only reached down to his
hips, and, over this, a hooded cape which barely covered his shoulders.
n his feet and legs were horsehide boots, the hairy side outwards. e
carried, or, rather, drew after him on a wheel, an eightpronged
warclub, so huge that eight men would have been needed to carry it and
the wheel, as he towed the whole weapon along, made a track like a
territorial boundary. Ancient and grayheaded as he was, and sturdy
porridgeeater, it will be seen from this that he was a formidable
fighter. e did great deeds in the battle between the gods and the
Fomors, and, on one occasion, is even said to have captured
singlehanded a hundredlegged and fourheaded monster called ata,
dragged him to the tone of enn, near the oyne, and killed him
there.

The agdas wife was called oann. he was connected in legend with the
iver oyne, to which she gave its name, and, indeed, its very
existence. Formerly there was only a well, shaded by nine magic
hazeltrees. These trees bore crimson nuts, and it was the property of
the nuts that whoever ate of them immediately became possessed of the
knowledge of everything that was in the world. The story is, in fact, a
aelic version of the ebrew myth of the Tree of the nowledge of ood
and Evil. ne class of creatures alone had this privilegedivine salmon
who lived in the well, and swallowed the nuts as they dropped from the
trees into the water, and thus knew all things, and appear in legend as
the almons of nowledge. All others, even the highest gods, were
forbidden to approach the place. nly oann, with the proverbial womans
curiosity, dared to disobey this fixed law. he came towards the sacred
well, but, as she did so, its waters rose up at her, and drove her away
before them in a mighty, rushing flood. he escaped but the waters
never returned. They made the oyne and as for the allknowing
inhabitants of the well, they wandered disconsolately through the depths
of the river, looking in vain for their lost nuts. ne of these salmon
was afterwards eaten by the famous Finn mac oul, upon whom all its
omniscience descended. This way of accounting for the existence of a
river is a favourite one in Irish legend. It is told also of the
hannon, which burst, like the oyne, from an inviolable well, to pursue
another presumptuous nymph called inann, a granddaughter of the seagod
Lr.

The agda had several children, the most important of whom are rigit,
Angus, ider, gma, and odb the ed. f these, rigit will be already
familiar to English readers who know nothing of eltic myth. riginally
she was a goddess of fire and the hearth, as well as of poetry, which
the aels deemed an immaterial, supersensual form of flame. ut the
early hristianizers of Ireland adopted the pagan goddess into their
roll of saintship, and, thus canonized, she obtained immense popularity
as aint ridget, or ride.

Angus was called ac c, which means the on of the Young, or,
perhaps, the Young od. This most charming of the creations of the
eltic mythology is represented as a aelic Eros, an eternally youthful
exponent of love and beauty. Like his father, he had a harp, but it was
of gold, not oak, as the agdas was, and so sweet was its music that no
one could hear and not follow it. is kisses became birds which hovered
invisibly over the young men and maidens of Erin, whispering thoughts of
love into their ears. e is chiefly connected with the banks of the
oyne, where he had a brugh, or fairy palace and many stories are
told of his exploits and adventures.

ider, also the hero of legends, would seem to have been a god of the
underworld, a aelic Pluto. As such, he was connected with the Isle of
Falgaa name for what was otherwise, and still is, called the Isle of
anwhere he had a stronghold in which he kept three wonderful cows and
a magic cauldron. e was also the owner of the Three ranes of enial
and hurlishness, which might be described flippantly as personified
gentle hints. They stood beside his door, and when anyone approached
to ask for hospitality, the first one said o not come do not come
and the second added et away get away while the third chimed in
with o past the house go past the house These three birds
were, however, stolen from ider by Aitherne, an avaricious poet, to
whom they would seem to have been more appropriate than to their owner,
who does not otherwise appear as a churlish and illiberal deity. n
the contrary, he is represented as the victim of others, who plundered
him freely. The god Angus took away his wife Etain, while his cows,
his cauldron, and his beautiful daughter lathnat were carried off as
spoil by the heroes or demigods who surrounded ing onchobar in the
golden age of lster.

gma, who appears to have been also called ermait, that is, the
honeymouthed, was the god of literature and elouence. e married
Etan, the daughter of iancecht, the god of medicine, and had several
children, who play parts more or less prominent in the mythology of the
aelic elts. ne of them was called Tuirenn, whose three sons murdered
the father of the sungod, and were compelled, as expiation, to pay the
greatest fine ever heard ofnothing less than the chief treasures of the
world. Another son, airpr, became the professional bard of the
Tuatha  anann, while three others reigned for a short time over the
divine race. As patron of literature, gma was naturally credited with
having been the inventor of the famous gam alphabet. This was an
indigenous script of Ireland, which spread afterwards to reat ritain,
inscriptions in ogmic characters having been found in cotland, the Isle
of an, outh Wales, evonshire, and at ilchester in ampshire, the
oman city of alleva Attrebatum. It was originally intended for
inscriptions upon upright pillarstones or upon wands, the euivalents
for letters being notches cut across, or strokes made upon one of the
faces of the angle, the alphabet running as follows

Illustration

When afterwards written in manuscript, the strokes were placed over,
under, or through a horizontal line, in the manner above and the vowels
were represented by short lines instead of notches, as

Illustration

A good example of an ogmic inscription is given in Professor hyss
ibbert Lectures. It comes from a pillar on a small promontory near
unmore ead, in the west of erry, and, read horizontally, reads

Illustration E, TE  F TE  F EA EEAT F
IIA.

The origin of this alphabet is obscure. ome authorities consider it of
great antiuity, while others believe it entirely posthristian. It
seems, at any rate, to have been based upon, and conseuently to
presuppose a knowledge of, the oman alphabet.

gma, besides being the patron of literature, was the champion, or
professional strong man of the Tuatha  anann. is epithet is
rianainech, that is, the unnyfaced, from his radiant and shining
countenance.

The last of the agdas more important children is odb the ed, who
plays a greater part in later than in earlier legend. e succeeded his
father as king of the gods. e is chiefly connected with the south of
Ireland, especially with the altee ountains, and with Lough earg,
where he had a famous sdh, or underground palace.

The Poseidon of the Tuatha  anann Pantheon was called Lr, but we
hear little of him in comparison with his famous son, anannn, the
greatest and most popular of his many children. anannn mac Lir was
the special patron of sailors, who invoked him as od of eadlands,
and of merchants, who claimed him as the first of their guild. is
favourite haunts were the Isle of an, to which he gave his name, and
the Isle of Arran, in the Firth of lyde, where he had a palace called
Emhain of the AppleTrees. e had many famous weaponstwo spears
called Yellow haft and ed avelin, a sword called The
etaliator, which never failed to slay, as well as two others known as
the reat Fury and the Little Fury. e had a boat called
Wavesweeper, which propelled and guided itself wherever its owner
wished, and a horse called plendid ane, which was swifter than the
spring wind, and travelled eually fast on land or over the waves of the
sea. o weapon could hurt him through his magic mail and breastplate,
and on his helmet there shone two magic ewels bright as the sun. e
endowed the gods with the mantle which made them invisible at will, and
he fed them from his pigs, which, like the boar hrimnir, in the orse
alhalla, renewed themselves as soon as they had been eaten. f these,
no doubt, he made his Feast of Age, the banuet at which those who ate
never grew old. Thus the people of the goddess anu preserved their
immortal youth, while the ale of oibniu the mithod bestowed
invulnerability upon them. It is fitting that anannn himself should
have been blessed beyond all the other gods with inexhaustible life up
to the latest days of Irish heroic literature his luminous figure shines
prominent, nor is it even yet wholly forgotten.

oibniu, the aelic ephaestus, who made the people of the goddess anu
invulnerable with his magic drink, was also the forger of their weapons.
It was he who, helped by Luchtain, the divine carpenter, and redn,
the divine bronzeworker, made the armoury with which the Tuatha 
anann conuered the Fomors. Eually useful to them was iancecht, the
god of medicine. It was he who once saved Ireland, and was
indirectly the cause of the name of the iver arrow. The orrg, the
heavengods fierce wife, had borne a son of such terrible aspect that
the physician of the gods, foreseeing danger, counselled that he should
be destroyed in his infancy. This was done and iancecht opened the
infants heart, and found within it three serpents, capable, when they
grew to full size, of depopulating Ireland. e lost no time in
destroying these serpents also, and burning them into ashes, to avoid
the evil which even their dead bodies might do. ore than this, he flung
the ashes into the nearest river, for he feared that there might be
danger even in them and, indeed, so venomous were they that the river
boiled up and slew every living creature in it, and therefore has been
called arrow boiling ever since.

iancecht had several children, of whom two followed their fathers
profession. These were iach and his sister Airmid. There were also
another daughter, Etan, who married ermait or gma, and three other
sons called ian, eth, and u. ian married Ethniu, the daughter of
alor the Fomor, and they had a son who was the crowning glory of the
aelic Pantheonits Apollo, the unod,Lugh, called
Lamhfada, which means the Longhanded, or the Farshooter. It
was not, however, with the bow, like the Apollo of the reeks, but with
the rodsling that Lugh performed his feats his worshippers sometimes
saw the terrible weapon in the sky as a rainbow, and the ilky Way was
called Lughs hain. e also had a magic spear, which, unlike the
rodsling, he had no need to wield, himself for it was alive, and
thirsted so for blood that only by steeping its head in a
sleepingdraught of pounded poppy leaves could it be kept at rest. When
battle was near, it was drawn out then it roared, and struggled against
its thongs fire flashed from it and, once slipped from the leash, it
tore through and through the ranks of the enemy, never tired of slaying.
Another of his possessions was a magic hound which an ancient poem,
attributed to the Fenian hero, aoilte, calls

            That hound of mightiest deeds,
             Which was irresistible in hardness of combat,
             Was better than wealth ever known,
             A ball of fire every night.

            ther virtues had that beautiful hound
             etter this property than any other property,
             ead or wine would grow of it,
             hould it bathe in spring water.

This marvellous hound, as well as the marvellous spear, and the
indestructible pigs of anannn were obtained for Lugh by the sons of
Tuirenn as part of the bloodfine he exacted from them for the murder of
his father ian. A hardly less curious story is that which tells how
Lugh got his name of the Ioldanach, or the aster of All Arts.

These are, of course, only the greater deities of the aelic Pantheon,
their divinities which answered to such ellenic figures as emeter,
eus, er, ronos, Athena, Eros, ades, ermes, ephaestus,
Aesculapius, and Apollo. All of them had many descendants, some of whom
play prominent parts in the heroic cycles of the ed ranch of lster
and of the Fenians. In addition to these, there must have been a
multitude of lesser gods who stood in much the same relation to the
great gods as the rank and file of tribesmen did to their chiefs. ost
of these were probably local deities of the various clansthe gods their
heroes swore by. ut it is also possible that some may have been
divinities of the aboriginal race. Professor hys thinks that he can
still trace a few of such Iberian gods by name, as t, i or oi, orb,
and eth. ut they play no recognizable part in the stories of the
aelic gods.



Footnote 

  Pronounced Tooha dae donnann.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, . Lecture Iods, emons, and eroes.

Footnote 

  Ibid.

Footnote 

  e ubainville Le ycle ythologiue Irlandais, chap. .

Footnote 

  e ubainville ycle ythologiue Irlandais, chap. I.

Footnote 

  From the fifteenthcentury arleian . in the ritish useum,
  numbered , and called the econd attle of oytura.

Footnote 

  arleian . .

Footnote 

  In unster was worshipped the goddess of prosperity, whose name was
  Ana, and from her are named the Two Paps of Ana over Luachair egad.
  From oir Anmann, the hoice of ames, a sixteenthcentury tract,
  published by r. Whitley tokes in Irische Texte.

Footnote 

  Attributed to ormac, ingishop of ashel.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, The eus of the Insular elts.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, The aulish Pantheon.

Footnote 

  Pharsalia, ook I, l. , c.

              Et uibus immitis placatur sanguine diro
               Teutates, horrensue feris altaribus esus
               Et Taranis cythicae non mitior ara ianae.

Footnote 

  Iliad, ook .

Footnote 

  p. cit., ook I.

Footnote 

  It commemorates the battle of agh ath.

Footnote 

  The word is approximately pronounced ive or ibe.

Footnote 

  For a full account of these beings see a paper by r. W. . ennessey
  in ol. I of the evue eltiue, entitled The Ancient Irish oddess
  of War.

Footnote 

  e ubainville Le ycle ythologiue. hys ibbert Lectures, p.
  . The oir Anmann, however, translates it Fire of od.

Footnote 

  The econd attle of oytura. arleian . .

Footnote 

  The story is told in the ook of Leinster.

Footnote 

  ow called Trinity Well.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IFinn and the Fenians.

Footnote 

  ook of Leinster. A paraphrase of the story will be found in urrys
  anners and ustoms of the Ancient Irish, ol. II, p. .

Footnote 

  ee chap. The ecline and Fall of the ods.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe ods in Exile.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IIIThe aelic Argonauts.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  Pronounced ove.

Footnote 

  Lrgenitive Lir.

Footnote 

  Pronounced ianket. is name is explained, both in the hoice of
  ames and in ormacs lossary, as meaning od of ealth.

Footnote 

  tandish rady The tory of Ireland, p. .

Footnote 

  Pronounced Luga or Loo.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Lavda.

Footnote 

  Translated by urry in Atlantis, ol. III, from the ook of
  Lismore.

Footnote 

  hap. IIIThe aelic Argonauts.

Footnote 

  hap. IIThe ise of the unod.

Footnote 

  hys eltic ritain, chap. II.






                               APTE I

                            TE  AIE


The people of the goddess anu were not the first divine inhabitants of
Ireland. thers had been before them, dwellers in the dark backward and
abysm of time. In this the eltic mythology resembles those of other
nations, in almost all of which we find an old, dim realm of gods
standing behind the reigning Pantheon. uch were ronos and the Titans,
dispossessed by the eus who seemed, even to esiod, something of a
parvenu deity. aelic tradition recognizes two divine dynasties
anterior to the Tuatha  anann. The first of these was called The
ace of Partholon. Its head and leader cameas all gods and men came,
according to eltic ideasfrom the ther World, and landed in Ireland
with a retinue of twentyfour males and twentyfour females upon the
first of ay, the day called eltaine, sacred to il, the god of
death. At this remote time, Ireland consisted of only one treeless,
grassless plain, watered by three lakes and nine rivers. ut, as the
race of Partholon increased, the land stretched, or widened, under
themsome said miraculously, and others, by the labours of Partholons
people. At any rate, during the three hundred years they dwelt there, it
grew from one plain to four, and acuired seven new lakes which was
fortunate, for the race of Partholon increased from fortyeight members
to five thousand, in spite of battles with the Fomors.

These would seem to have been inevitable. Whatever gods ruled, they
found themselves in eternal opposition to the notgodsthe powers of
darkness, winter, evil, and death. The race of Partholon warred against
them with success. At the Plain of Ith, Partholon defeated their leader,
a gigantic demon called ichol the Footless, and dispersed his deformed
and monstrous host. After this there was uiet for three hundred years.
Thenupon the same fatal first of aythere began a mysterious epidemic,
which lasted a week, and destroyed them all. In premonition of their
end, they foregathered upon the original, firstcreated plainthen
called en ag, or the ld Plain,so that those who survived might
the more easily bury those that died. Their funeralplace is still
marked by a mound near ublin, called Tallaght in the maps, but
formerly known as Tamlecht uintre Partholain, the Plaguegrave of
Partholons People. This would seem to have been a development of the
very oldest form of the legendwhich knew nothing of a plague, but
merely represented the people of Partholon as having returned, after
their soourn in Ireland, to the other world, whence they cameand is
probably due to the gradual euhemerization of the ancient gods into
ancient men.

Following the race of Partholon, came the race of emed, which carried
on the work and traditions of its forerunner. uring its time, Ireland
again enlarged herself, to the extent of twelve new plains and four more
lakes. Like the people of Partholon, the race of emed struggled with
the Fomors, and defeated them in four consecutive battles. Then emed
died, with two thousand of his people, from an epidemic, and the
remnant, left without their leader, were terribly oppressed by the
Fomors. Two Fomorian kingsorc, son of ela, and onann, son of
Febarhad built a tower of glass upon Tory Island, always their chief
stronghold, and where stories of them still linger, and from this
vantagepoint they dictated a tax which recalls that paid, in reek
story, to the retan inotaur. Twothirds of the children born to the
race of emed during the year were to be delivered up on each day of
amhain. oaded by this to a last desperate effort, the survivors of
emeds people attacked the tower, and took it, onann perishing in the
struggle. ut their triumph was short. orc, the other king, collected
his forces, and inflicted such a slaughter upon the people of emed
that, out of the sixteen thousand who had assembled for the storming of
the tower, only thirty survived. And these returned whence they came, or
diedthe two acts being, mythologically speaking, the same.

ne cannot help seeing a good deal of similarity between the stories of
these two mythical invasions of Ireland. Especially noticeable is the
account of the epidemic which destroyed all Partholons people and
nearly all of emeds. ence it has been held that the two legends are
duplicates, and that there was at first only one, which has been adapted
somewhat differently by two races, the Iberians and the aels. Professor
hys considers the account of emed to have been the original eltic
one, and the Partholon story, the version of it which the native races
made to please themselves. The name Partholon, with its initial p,
is entirely foreign to the genius of aelic speech. oreover, Partholon
himself is given, by the early chroniclers, ancestors whose decidedly
nonAryan names reappear afterwards as the names of Fir olg chiefs.
emed was later than Partholon in Ireland, as the aels, or ilesians,
were later than the Iberians, or Fir olgs.

These Fir olgs are found in myth as the next colonizers of Ireland.
arying traditions say that they came from reece, or from painwhich
was a posthristian euphemism for the eltic ades. They consisted
of three tribes, called the Fir omnann or en of omnu, the Fir
aillion or en of aillion, and the Fir olg or en of olg
but, in spite of the fact that the firstnamed tribe was the most
important, they are usually called collectively after the last. urious
stories are told of their life in reece, and how they came to Ireland
but these are somewhat factitious, and obviously do not belong to the
earliest tradition.

In the time of their domination they had, we are told, partitioned
Ireland among them the Fir olg held lster the Fir omnann, divided
into three kingdoms, occupied orth unster, outh unster, and
onnaught while the Fir aillion owned Leinster. These five provinces
met at a hill then called alors ill, but afterwards the ill of
isnech. It is near athconrath, in the county of West eath, and was
believed, in early times, to mark the exact centre of Ireland. They held
the country from the departure of the people of emed to the coming of
the people of the goddess anu, and during this period they had nine
supreme kings. At the time of the arrival of the gods, their kings name
was Eochaid son of Erc, surnamed The Proud.

We have practically no other details regarding their life in Ireland. It
is obvious, however, that they were not really gods, but the preAryan
race which the aels, when they landed in Ireland, found already in
occupation. There are many instances of peoples at a certain stage of
culture regarding tribes in a somewhat lower one as semidivine, or,
rather, halfdiabolical. The suspicion and fear with which the early
elts must have regarded the savage aborigines made them seem larger
than human. They feared them for the weird magical rites which they
practised in their inaccessible forts among the hills, amid storms and
mountain mists. The aels, who held themselves to be the children of
light, deemed these dark Iberians children of the dark. Their tribal
names seem to have been, in several instances, founded upon this idea.
There were the orcaidce People of arkness and the
orcauibhne People of the ight. The territory of the western
tribe of the i orchaide ons of ark was called the ight
ountry. The elts, who held their own gods to have preceded them
into Ireland, would not believe that even the Tuatha  anann could
have wrested the land from these magicskilled Iberians without battle.

They seem also to have been considered as in some way connected with the
Fomors. ust as the largest Iberian tribe was called the en of omnu,
so the Fomors were called the ods of omnu, and Indech, one of their
kings, is a son of omnu. Thus eternal battle between the gods,
children of anu, and the giants, children of omnu, would reflect, in
the supernatural world, the perpetual warfare between invading elt and
resisting Iberian. It is shadowed, too, in the later heroic cycle. The
champions of lster, Aryans and aels par excellence, have no such
bitter enemies as the Fir omnann of unster and the Fir aillion of
Leinster. A few scholars would even see in the later deathstruggle
between the igh ing of Ireland and his rebellious Fenians the last
historic or mythological adumbration of racial war.

The enemies alike of Fir olg and Fomor, the Tuatha  anann, gods of
the aels, were the next to arrive. What is probably the earliest
account tells us that they came from the sky. Later versions, however,
give them a habitation upon earthsome say in the north, others in the
southern isles of the world. They had dwelt in four mythical cities
called Findias, orias, urias, and Falias, where they had learned
poetry and magicto the primitive mind two not very dissimilar
thingsand whence they had brought to Ireland their four chief
treasures. From Findias came uadas sword, from whose stroke no one
ever escaped or recovered from orias, Lughs terrible lance from
urias, the agdas cauldron and from Falias, the tone of Fl, better
known as the tone of estiny, which afterwards fell into the hands of
the early kings of Ireland. According to legend, it had the magic
property of uttering a human cry when touched by the rightful ing of
Erin. ome have recognized in this marvellous stone the same rude block
which Edward I brought from cone in the year , and placed in
Westminster Abbey, where it now forms part of the oronation hair. It
is a curious fact that, while cottish legend asserts this stone to have
come to cotland from Ireland, Irish legend should also declare that it
was taken from Ireland to cotland. This would sound like conclusive
evidence, but it is none the less held by leading modern
archologistsincluding r. W. F. kene, who has published a monograph
on the subectthat the tone of cone and the tone of Tara were
never the same. r. Petrie identifies the real Lia Fil with a stone
which has always remained in Ireland, and which was removed from its
original position on Tara ill, in , to mark the tomb of the rebels
buried close by under a mound now known as the roppies grave.

Whether the Tuatha  anann came from earth or heaven, they landed in a
dense cloud upon the coast of Ireland on the mystic first of ay without
having been opposed, or even noticed by the people whom it will be
convenient to follow the manuscript authorities in calling the Fir
olgs. That those might still be ignorant of their coming, the
orrg, helped by adb and acha, made use of the magic they had
learned in Findias, orias, urias, and Falias. They spread
druidicallyformed showers and fogsustaining showerclouds over the
country, and caused the air to pour down fire and blood upon the Fir
olgs, so that they were obliged to shelter themselves for three days
and three nights. ut the Fir olgs had druids of their own, and, in the
end, they put a stop to these enchantments by counterspells, and the
air grew clear again.

The Tuatha  anann, advancing westward, had reached a place called the
Plain of the ea, in Leinster, when the two armies met. Each sent out
a warrior to parley. The two adversaries approached each other
cautiously, their eyes peeping over the tops of their shields. Then,
coming gradually nearer, they spoke to one another, and the desire to
examine each others weapons made them almost friends.

The envoy of the Fir olgs looked with wonder at the
beautifullyshaped, thin, slender, long, sharppointed spears of the
warrior of the Tuatha  anann, while the ambassador of the tribe of
the goddess anu was not less impressed by the lances of the Fir olgs,
which were heavy, thick, pointless, but sharplyrounded. They agreed
to exchange weapons, so that each side might, by an examination of them,
be able to come to some opinion as to its opponents strength. efore
parting, the envoy of the Tuatha  anann offered the Fir olgs,
through their representative, peace, with a division of the country into
two eual halves.

The Fir olg envoy advised his people to accept this offer. ut their
king, Eochaid, son of Erc, would not. If we once give these people
half, he said, they will soon have the whole.

The people of the goddess anu were, on the other hand, very much
impressed by the sight of the Fir olgs weapons. They decided to secure
a more advantageous position, and, retreating farther west into
onnaught, to a plain then called ia, but now oytura, near the present
village of ong, they drew up their line at its extreme end, in front of
the pass of algatan, which offered a retreat in case of defeat.

The Fir olgs followed them, and encamped on the nearer side of the
plain. Then uada, ing of the Tuatha  anann, sent an ambassador
offering the same terms as before. Again the Fir olgs declined them.

Then when, asked the envoy, do you intend to give battle

We must have a truce, they said, for we want time to repair our
armour, burnish our helmets, and sharpen our swords. esides, we must
have spears like yours made for us, and you must have spears like ours
made for you.

The result of this chivalrous, but, to modern ideas, amazing, parley was
that a truce of one hundred and five days was agreed upon.

It was on idsummer ay that the opposing armies at last met. The people
of the goddess anu appeared in a flaming line, wielding their
redbordered, speckled, and firm shields. pposite to them were ranged
the Fir olgs, sparkling, brilliant, and flaming, with their swords,
spears, blades, and trowelspears. The proceedings began with a kind of
deadly hurleymatch, in which thrice nine of the Tuatha  anann played
the same number of the Fir olgs, and were defeated and killed. Then
followed another parley, to decide how the battle should be carried on,
whether there should be fighting every day or only on every second day.
oreover, uada obtained from Eochaid an assurance that the battles
should always be fought with eual numbers, although this was, we are
told, very disagreeable to the Fir olg king, because he had largely
the advantage in the numbers of his army. Then warfare recommenced with
a series of single combats, like those of the reeks and Troans in the
Iliad. At the end of each day the conuerors on both sides went back
to their camps, and were refreshed by being bathed in healing baths of
medicinal herbs.

o the fight went on for four days, with terrible slaughter upon each
side. A Fir olg champion called reng fought in single combat with
uada, the ing of the ods, and shore off his hand and half his shield
with one terrific blow. Eochaid, the ing of the Fir olgs, was even
less fortunate than uada for he lost his life. uffering terribly from
thirst, he went, with a hundred of his men, to look for water, and was
followed, and pursued as far as the strand of allysadare, in ligo.
ere he turned to bay, but was killed, his grave being still marked by a
tumulus. The Fir olgs, reduced at last to three hundred men, demanded
single combat until all upon one side were slain. ut, sooner than
consent to this, the Tuatha  anann offered them a fifth part of
Ireland, whichever province they might choose. They agreed, and chose
onnaught, ever afterwards their especial home, and where, until the
middle of the seventeenth century, men were still found tracing their
descent from reng.

The whole story has a singularly historical, curiously unmythological
air about it, which contrasts strangely with the account of the other
battle of the same name which the Tuatha  anann waged afterwards with
the Fomors. The neighbourhood of ong still preserves both relics and
traditions of the fight. pon the plain of outhern oytura as it is
called, to distinguish it from the orthern oytura of the second
battle are many circles and tumuli. These circles are especially
numerous near the village itself and it is said that there were
formerly others, which have been used for making walls and dykes. Large
cairns of stones, too, are scattered over what was certainly once the
scene of a great battle. These various prehistoric monuments each
have their stilltold story and ir William Wilde, as he relates in his
Lough orrib, was so impressed by the unexpected agreement
between the details of the legendary battle, as he read them in the
ancient manuscript, and the traditions still attaching to the mounds,
circles, and cairns, that he tells us he could not help coming to the
conclusion that the account was absolutely historical. ertainly the
coincidences are curious. is opinion was that the Fir olgs were a
colony of elg, and that the Tuatha  anann were anes. ut the
people of the goddess anu are too obviously mythical to make it worth
while to seek any standingground for them in the world of reality. In
their superhuman attributes, they are uite different from the Fir
olgs. In the epical cycle it is made as clear that the Tuatha  anann
are divine beings as it is that the Fir olg, the Fir omnann, and the
Fir aillion stand on exactly the same footing as the men of lster.
Later history records by what ilesian kings and on what terms of
rackrent the three tribes were allowed settlements in other parts of
Ireland than their native onnaught. They appear in ancient, medival,
and almost modern chronicles as the old race of the land. The truth
seems to be that the whole story of the war between the gods and the Fir
olgs is an invention of comparatively late times. In the earliest
documents there is only one battle of oytura, fought between the people
of the goddess anu and the Fomors. The idea of doubling it seems to
date from after the eleventh century and its inventor may very
well have used the legends concerning this battlefield, where two
unknown armies had fought in days gone by, in compiling his story. It
never belonged to the same genuine mythological stratum as the legend of
the original battle fought by the Tuatha  anann, the gods of the
aels, against the Fomors, the gods of the Iberians.



Footnote 

  e ubainville ycle ythologiue, chap. .

Footnote 

  hys The ythographical Treatment of eltic Ethnology, cottish
  eview, ct. .

Footnote 

  e ubainville ycle ythologiue, chap. . hys ibbert
  Lectures, pp. , .

Footnote 

  Pronounced Ecca or Eohee.

Footnote 

  omme Ethnology in Folklore, chap. IIIThe ythic Influence of a
  onuered ace.

Footnote 

  Elton rigins of English istory, note to p. .

Footnote 

  It has been contended that the Fenians were originally the gods or
  heroes of an aboriginal people in Ireland, the myths about them
  representing the preeltic and preAryan ideal, as the sagas of the
  ed ranch of lster embodied that of the eltic Aryans. The uestion,
  however, is as yet far from being satisfactorily solved.

Footnote 

  The oronation tone, by William Forbes kene.

Footnote 

  ee istory and Antiuities of Tara ill.

Footnote 

  ur authorities for the details of this war between the Tuatha 
  anann and the Fir olgs are the opening verses of the arleian .
  , as translated by tokes and e ubainville, and Eugene urrys
  translations, in his . aterials of Ancient Irish istory and his
  anners and ustoms of the Ancient Irish, from a manuscript
  preserved at Trinity ollege, ublin.

Footnote 

  ow called enlevi.

Footnote 

  ee r. ames Fergusson ude tone onuments, pp. .

Footnote 

  Lough orrib, Its hores and Islands, by ir William . Wilde, chap.
  III.

Footnote 

  e ubainville ycle ythologiue Irlandais, p. .






                              APTE II

                      TE IE F TE 


It was as a result of the loss of his hand in this battle with the Fir
olgs that uada got his name of Argetlm, that is, the ilver
anded. For iancecht, the physician of the Tuatha  anann, made him
an artificial hand of silver, so skilfully that it moved in all its
oints, and was as strong and supple as a real one. ut, good as it was
of its sort, it was a blemish and, according to eltic custom, no
maimed person could sit upon the throne. uada was deposed and the
Tuatha  anann went into council to appoint a new king.

They agreed that it would be a politic thing for them to conciliate the
Fomors, the giants of the sea, and make an alliance with them. o they
sent a message to ress, the son of the Fomorian king, Elathan, asking
him to come and rule over them. ress accepted this offer and they made
a marriage between him and rigit, the daughter of the agda. At the
same time, ian, the son of iancecht, the physician of the Tuatha
 anann, married Ethniu, the daughter of the Fomor, alor. Then ress
was made king, and endowed with lands and a palace and he, on his part,
gave hostages that he would abdicate if his rule ever became unpleasing
to those who had elected him.

ut, in spite of all his fair promises, ress, who belonged in heart to
his own fierce people, began to oppress his subects with excessive
taxes. e put a tax upon every hearth, upon every kneadingtrough, and
upon every uern, as well as a polltax of an ounce of gold upon every
member of the Tuatha  anann. y a crafty trick, too, he obtained the
milk of all their cattle. e asked at first only for the produce of any
cows which happened to be brown and hairless, and the people of the
goddess anu granted him this cheerfully. ut ress passed all the
cattle in Ireland between two fires, so that their hair was singed off,
and thus obtained the monopoly of the main source of food. To earn a
livelihood, all the gods, even the greatest, were now forced to labour
for him. gma, their champion, was sent out to collect firewood, while
the agda was put to work building forts and castles.

ne day, when the agda was at his task, his son, Angus, came to him.
You have nearly finished that castle, he said. What reward do you
intend to ask from ress when it is done The agda replied that he had
not yet thought of it. Let me give you some advice, said Angus. Ask
ress to have all the cattle in Ireland gathered together upon a plain,
so that you can pick out one for yourself. e will consent to that. Then
choose the blackmaned heifer called cean.

The agda finished building the fort, and then went to ress for his
reward. What will you have asked ress. I want all the cattle in
Ireland gathered together upon a plain, so that I may choose one of them
for myself. ress did this and the agda took the blackmaned heifer
Angus had told him of. The king, who had expected to be asked very much
more, laughed at what he thought was the agdas simplicity. ut Angus
had been wise as will be seen hereafter.

eanwhile ress was infuriating the people of the goddess anu by adding
avarice to tyranny. It was for kings to be liberal to allcomers, but at
the court of ress no one ever greased his knife with fat, or made his
breath smell of ale. or were there ever any poets or musicians or
ugglers or esters there to give pleasure to the people for ress
would distribute no largess. ext, he cut down the very subsistence of
the gods. o scanty was his allowance of food that they began to grow
weak with famine. gma, through feebleness, could only carry onethird
of the wood needed for fuel so that they suffered from cold as well as
from hunger.

It was at this crisis that two physicians, iach, the son, and Airmid,
the daughter, of iancecht, the god of medicine, came to the castle
where the dispossessed ing uada lived. uadas porter, blemished, like
himself for he had lost an eye, was sitting at the gate, and on his
lap was a cat curled up asleep. The porter asked the strangers who they
were. We are good doctors, they said. If that is so, he replied,
perhaps you can give me a new eye. ertainly, they said, we could
take one of the eyes of that cat, and put it in the place where your
lost eye used to be. I should be very pleased if you would do that,
answered the porter, o iach and Airmid removed one of the cats eyes,
and put it in the hollow where the mans eye had been.

The story goes on to say that this was not wholly a benefit to him for
the eye retained its cats nature, and, when the man wished to sleep at
nights, the cats eye was always looking out for mice, while it could
hardly be kept awake during the day. evertheless, he was pleased at the
time, and went and told uada, who commanded that the doctors who had
performed this marvellous cure should be brought to him.

As they came in, they heard the king groaning, for uadas wrist had
festered where the silver hand oined the arm of flesh. iach asked
where uadas own hand was, and they told him that it had been buried
long ago. ut he dug it up, and placed it to uadas stump he uttered
an incantation over it, saying inew to sinew, and nerve to nerve be
oined and in three days and nights the hand had renewed itself and
fixed itself to the arm, so that uada was whole again.

When iancecht, iachs father, heard of this, he was very angry to
think that his son should have excelled him in the art of medicine. e
sent for him, and struck him upon the head with a sword, cutting the
skin, but not wounding the flesh. iach easily healed this. o iancecht
hit him again, this time to the bone. Again iach cured himself. The
third time his father smote him, the sword went right through the skull
to the membrane of the brain, but even this wound iach was able to
leech. At the fourth stroke, however, iancecht cut the brain in two,
and iach could do nothing for that. e died, and iancecht buried him.
And upon his grave there grew up three hundred and sixtyfive stalks of
grass, each one a cure for any illness of each of the three hundred and
sixtyfive nerves in a mans body. Airmid, iachs sister, plucked all
these very carefully, and arranged them on her mantle according to their
properties. ut her angry and ealous father overturned the cloak, and
hopelessly confused them. If it had not been for that act, says the
early writer, men would know how to cure every illness, and would so be
immortal.

The healing of uadas blemish happened ust at the time when all the
people of the goddess anu had at last agreed that the exactions and
tyranny of ress could no longer be borne. It was the insult he put upon
airpr, son of gma the god of literature, that caused things to come
to this head. Poets were always held by the elts in great honour and
when airpr, the bard of the Tuatha  anann, went to visit ress, he
expected to be treated with much consideration, and fed at the kings
own table. ut, instead of doing so, ress lodged him in a small, dark
room where there was no fire, no bed, and no furniture except a mean
table on which small cakes of dry bread were put on a little dish for
his food. The next morning, airpr rose early and left the palace
without having spoken to ress. It was the custom of poets when they
left a kings court to utter a panegyric on their host, but airpr
treated ress instead to a magical satire. It was the first satire ever
made in Ireland, and seems to us to bear upon it all the marks of an
early effort. oughly rendered, it said

            o meat on the plates,
               o milk of the cows
             o shelter for the belated
               o money for the minstrels
             ay resss cheer be what he gives to others

This satire of airprs was, we are assured, so virulent that it caused
great red blotches to break out all over resss face. This in itself
constituted a blemish such as should not be upon a king, and the Tuatha
 anann called upon ress to abdicate and let uada take the throne
again.

ress was obliged to do so. e went back to the country of the Fomors,
underneath the sea, and complained to his father Elathan, its king,
asking him to gather an army to reconuer his throne. The Fomors
assembled in councilElathan, Tethra, alor, Indech, and all the other
warriors and chiefsand they decided to come with a great host, and take
Ireland away, and put it under the sea where the people of the goddess
anu would never be able to find it again.

At the same time, another assembly was also being held at Tara, the
capital of the Tuatha  anann. uada was celebrating his return to the
throne by a feast to his people. While it was at its height, a stranger
clothed like a king came to the palace gate. The porter asked him his
name and errand.

I am called Lugh, he said. I am the grandson of iancecht by ian, my
father, and the grandson of alor by Ethniu, my mother.

ut what is your profession asked the porter for no one is admitted
here unless he is a master of some craft.

I am a carpenter, said Lugh.

We have no need of a carpenter. We already have a very good one his
name is Luchtain.

I am an excellent smith, said Lugh.

We do not want a smith. We have a very good one his name is oibniu.

I am a professional warrior, said Lugh.

We have no need of one. gma is our champion.

I am a harpist, said Lugh.

We have an excellent harpist already.

I am a warrior renowned for skilfulness rather than for mere strength.

We already have a man like that.

I am a poet and taleteller, said Lugh.

We have no need of such. We have a most accomplished poet and
taleteller.

I am a sorcerer, said Lugh.

We do not want one. We have numberless sorcerers and druids.

I am a physician, said Lugh.

iancecht is our physician.

I am a cupbearer, said Lugh.

We already have nine of them.

I am a worker in bronze.

We have no need of you. We already have a worker in bronze. is name is
redn.

Then ask the king, said Lugh, if he has with him a man who is master
of all these crafts at once, for, if he has, there is no need for me to
come to Tara.

o the doorkeeper went inside, and told the king that a man had come
who called himself Lugh the Ioldanach, or the aster of all
Arts, and that he claimed to know everything.

The king sent out his best chessplayer to play against the stranger.
Lugh won, inventing a new move called Lughs enclosure.

Then uada invited him in. Lugh entered, and sat down upon the chair
called the sages seat, kept for the wisest man.

gma, the champion, was showing off his strength. pon the floor was a
flagstone so large that fourscore yokes of oxen would have been needed
to move it. gma pushed it before him along the hall, and out at the
door. Then Lugh rose from his chair, and pushed it back again. ut this
stone, huge as it was, was only a portion broken from a still greater
rock outside the palace. Lugh picked it up, and put it back into its
place.

The Tuatha  anann asked him to play the harp to them. o he played
the sleeptune, and the king and all his court fell asleep, and did
not wake until the same hour of the following day. ext he played a
plaintive air, and they all wept. Lastly, he played a measure which sent
them into transports of oy.

When uada had seen all these numerous talents of Lugh, he began to
wonder whether one so gifted would not be of great help against the
Fomors. e took counsel with the others, and, by their advice, lent his
throne to Lugh for thirteen days, taking the sages seat at his side.

Lugh summoned all the Tuatha  anann to a council.

The Fomors are certainly going to make war on us, he said. What can
each of you do to help

iancecht the Physician said I will completely cure everyone who is
wounded, provided his head is not cut off, or his brain or spinal marrow
hurt.

I, said oibniu the mith, will replace every broken lance and sword
with a new one, even though the war last seven years. And I will make
the lances so well that they shall never miss their mark, or fail to
kill. ulb, the smith of the Fomors, cannot do as much as that. The fate
of the fighting will be decided by my lances.

And I, said redn the ronzeworker, will furnish all the rivets for
the lances, the hilts for the swords, and the rims and bosses for the
shields.

And I, said Luchtain the arpenter, will provide all the shields and
lanceshafts.

gma the hampion promised to kill the ing of the Fomors, with thrice
nine of his followers, and to capture onethird of his army.

And you,  agda, said Lugh, what will you do

I will fight, said the agda, both with force and craft. Wherever the
two armies meet, I will crush the bones of the Fomors with my club, till
they are like hailstones under a horses feet.

And you,  orrg said Lugh.

I will pursue them when they flee, she replied. And I always catch
what I chase.

And you,  airpr, son of Etan said Lugh to the poet, what can you
do

I will pronounce an immediatelyeffective curse upon them by one of my
satires I will take away all their honour, and, enchanted by me, they
shall not be able to stand against our warriors.

And ye,  sorcerers, what will ye do

We will hurl by our magic arts, replied athgan, the head sorcerer,
the twelve mountains of Ireland at the Fomors. These mountains will be
lieve League, enna lad, the ourne ountains, ri uri, lieve loom,
lieve nechta, lemish, lailiab, ephin, liab accu elgodon,
egais, and ruachan Aigle.

Then Lugh asked the cupbearers what they would do.

We will hide away by magic, they said, the twelve chief lakes and the
twelve chief rivers of Ireland from the Fomors, so that they shall not
be able to find any water, however thirsty they may be those waters
will conceal themselves from the Fomors so that they shall not get a
drop, while they will give drink to the people of the goddess anu as
long as the war lasts, even if it last seven years. And they told Lugh
that the twelve chief lakes were Lough erg, Lough Luimnigh, Lough
orrib, Lough ee, Lough ask, trangford Lough, Lough Lig, Lough
eagh, Lough Foyle, Lough ara, Lough eagh, and rloch, and that the
twelve chief rivers were the ush, the oyne, the ann, the em, the
Lee, the hannon, the oy, the ligo, the Erne, the Finn, the Liffey,
and the uir.

Finally, the ruid, Figol, son of amos, said I will send three
streams of fire into the faces of the Fomors, and I will take away
twothirds of their valour and strength, but every breath drawn by the
people of the goddess anu will only make them more valorous and strong,
so that even if the fighting lasts seven years, they will not be weary
of it.

All decided to make ready for a war, and to give the direction of it to
Lugh.



Footnote 

  The principal sources of information for this chapter are the arleian
  .  entitled The econd attle of oytura, of which
  translations have been made by r. Whitley tokes in the evue
  eltiue and . de ubainville in his Lpope eltiue en Irlande,
  and Eugene urrys translation in ol. I. of Atlantis of the
  Fate of the hildren of Tuirenn.

Footnote 

  Pronounced ian.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Ildna.

Footnote 

  The urlieu ills, between oscommon and ligo.

Footnote 

  roagh Patrick.

Footnote 

  The estuary of the hannon.






                              APTE III

                          TE AELI AAT


The preparations for this war are said to have lasted seven years. It
was during the interval that there befel an episode which might almost
be called the Argonautica of the aelic mythology.

In spite of the dethronement of ress, the Fomors still claimed their
annual tribute from the tribe of the goddess anu, and sent their
taxgatherers, nine times nine in number, to alors ill to collect
it. ut, while they waited for the gods to come to tender their
submission and their subsidy, they saw a young man approaching them. e
was riding upon plendid ane, the horse of anannn son of Lr, and
was dressed in anannns breastplate and helmet, through which no
weapon could wound their wearer, and he was armed with sword and shield
and poisoned darts. Like to the setting sun, says the story, was the
splendour of his countenance and his forehead, and they were not able to
look in his face for the greatness of his splendour. And no wonder for
he was Lugh the Farshooter, the newcome sungod of the aels. e fell
upon the Fomorian taxgatherers, killing all but nine of them, and these
he only spared that they might go back to their kinsmen and tell how the
gods had received them.

There was consternation in the undersea country. Who can this terrible
warrior be asked alor. I know, said alors wife he must be the
son of our daughter Ethniu and I foretell that, since he has cast in
his lot with his fathers people, we shall never bear rule in Erin
again.

The chiefs of the Fomors saw that this slaughter of their taxgatherers
signified that the Tuatha  anann meant fighting. They held a council
to debate on it. There came to it Elathan and Tethra and Indech, kings
of the Fomors ress himself, and alor of the stout blows ethlenn the
crooked tooth, alors wife alors twelve whitemouthed sons and all
the chief Fomorian warriors and druids.

eanwhile, upon earth, Lugh was sending messengers all over Erin to
assemble the Tuatha  anann. pon this errand went Lughs father ian,
who seems to have been a kind of lesser solar deity, son of
iancecht, the god of medicine. As ian was going over the plain of
uirthemne, he saw three armed warriors approaching him, and, when
they got nearer, he recognized them as the three sons of Tuirenn, son of
gma, whose names were rian, Iuchar, and Iucharba. etween these three
and ian, with his brothers eth and u, there was, for some reason, a
private enmity. ian saw that he was now at a disadvantage. If my
brothers were with me, he said to himself, what a fight we would make
but, as I am alone, it will be best for me to conceal myself. Looking
round, he saw a herd of pigs feeding on the plain. Like all the gods, he
had the faculty of shapeshifting so, striking himself with a magic
wand, he changed himself into a pig, oined the herd, and began feeding
with them.

ut he had been seen by the sons of Tuirenn. What has become of the
warrior who was walking on the plain a moment ago said rian to his
brothers. We saw him then, they replied, but we do not know where he
is now. Then you have not used the proper vigilance which is needed in
time of war, said the elder brother. owever, I know what has become
of him. e has struck himself with a druidical wand, and changed himself
into a pig, and there he is, in that herd, rooting up the ground, ust
like all the other pigs. I can also tell you who he is. is name is
ian, and you know that he is no friend of ours.

It is a pity that he has taken refuge among the pigs, they replied,
for they belong to some one of the Tuatha  anann, and, even if we
were to kill them all, ian might still escape us.

Again rian reproached his brothers. You are very ignorant, he said,
if you cannot distinguish a magical beast from a natural beast.
owever, I will show you. And thereupon he struck his two brothers with
his own wand of shapechanging, and turned them into two swift, slender
hounds, and set them upon the pigs.

The magic hounds soon found the magic pig, and drove it out of the herd
on to the open plain. Then rian threw his spear, and hit it. The
wounded pig came to a stop. It was an evil deed of yours, casting that
spear, it cried, in a human voice, for I am not a pig, but ian, son
of iancecht. o give me uarter.

Iuchar and Iucharba would have granted it, and let him go but their
fiercer brother swore that ian should be put an end to, even if he came
back to life seven times. o ian tried a fresh ruse. ive me leave,
he asked, only to return to my own shape before you slay me. ladly,
replied rian, for I would much rather kill a man than a pig.

o ian spoke the befitting spell, cast off his pigs disguise, and
stood before them in his own shape. You will be obliged to spare my
life now, he said. We will not, replied rian. Then it will be the
worst days work for all of you that you ever did in your lives, he
answered for, if you had killed me in the shape of a pig, you would
only have had to pay the value of a pig, but if you kill me now, I tell
you that there never has been, and there never will be, anyone killed in
this world for whose death a greater bloodfine will be exacted than for
mine.

ut the sons of Tuirenn would not listen to him. They slew him, and
pounded his body with stones until it was a crushed mass. ix times they
tried to bury him, and the earth cast him back in horror but, the
seventh time, the mould held him, and they put stones upon him to keep
him down. They left him buried there, and went to Tara.

eanwhile Lugh had been expecting his fathers return. As he did not
come, he determined to go and look for him. e traced him to the Plain
of uirthemne, and there he was at fault. ut the indignant earth
itself, which had witnessed the murder, spoke to Lugh, and told him
everything. o Lugh dug up his fathers corpse, and made certain how he
had come to his death then he mourned over him, and laid him back in
the earth, and heaped a barrow over him, and set up a pillar with his
name on it in ogam.

e went back to Tara, and entered the great hall. It was filled with the
people of the goddess anu, and among them Lugh saw the three sons of
Tuirenn. o he shook the chiefs chain, with which the aels used to
ask for a hearing in an assembly, and when all were silent, he said

People of the goddess anu, I ask you a uestion. What would be the
vengeance that any of you would take upon one who had murdered his
father

A great astonishment fell upon them, and uada, their king, said
urely it is not your father that has been murdered

It is, replied Lugh. And I am looking at those who murdered him and
they know how they did it better than I do.

Then uada declared that nothing short of hewing the murderer of his
father limb from limb would satisfy him, and all the others said the
same, including the sons of Tuirenn.

The very ones who did the deed say that, cried Lugh. Then let them
not leave the hall till they have settled with me about the bloodfine
to be paid for it.

If it was I who had killed your father, said the king, I should think
myself lucky if you were willing to accept a fine instead of vengeance.

The sons of Tuirenn took counsel together in whispers. Iuchar and
Iucharba were in favour of admitting their guilt, but rian was afraid
that, if they confessed, Lugh would withdraw his offer to accept a fine,
and would demand their deaths. o he stood out, and said that, though it
was not they who had killed ian, yet, sooner than remain under Lughs
anger, as he suspected them, they would pay the same fine as if they
had.

ertainly you shall pay the fine, said Lugh, and I will tell you what
it shall be. It is this three apples and a pigsskin and a spear
and two horses and a chariot and seven pigs and a houndwhelp and a
cookingspit and three shouts on a hill that is the fine, and, if you
think it is too much, I will remit some of it, but, if you do not think
it is too much, then pay it.

If it were a hundred times that, replied rian, we should not think
it too much. Indeed, it seems so little that I fear there must be some
treachery concealed in it.

I do not think it too little, replied Lugh. ive me your pledge
before the people of the goddess anu that you will pay it faithfully,
and I will give you mine that I will ask no more.

o the sons of Tuirenn bound themselves before the Tuatha  anann to
pay the fine to Lugh.

When they had sworn, and given sureties, Lugh turned to them again. I
will now, he said, explain to you the nature of the fine you have
pledged yourselves to pay me, so that you may know whether it is too
little or not. And, with foreboding hearts, the sons of Tuirenn set
themselves to listen.

The three apples that I have demanded, he began, are three apples
from the arden of the esperides, in the east of the world. You will
know them by three signs. They are the size of the head of a monthold
child, they are of the colour of burnished gold, and they taste of
honey. Wounds are healed and diseases cured by eating them, and they do
not diminish in any way by being eaten. Whoever casts one of them hits
anything he wishes, and then it comes back into his hand. I will accept
no other apples instead of these. Their owners keep them perpetually
guarded because of a prophecy that three young warriors from the west of
the world will come to take them by force, and, brave as you may be, I
do not think that you will ever get them.

The pigsskin that I have demanded is the pigsskin of Tuis, ing of
reece. It has two virtues its touch perfectly cures all wounded or
sick persons if only there is any life still left in them and every
stream of water through which it passes is turned into wine for nine
days. I do not think that you will get it from the ing of reece,
either with his consent or without it.

And can you guess what spear it is that I have demanded asked Lugh.
We cannot, they said. It is the poisoned spear of Pisear, ing
of Persia it is irresistible in battle it is so fiery that its blade
must always be held under water, lest it destroy the city in which it is
kept. You will find it very difficult to obtain.

And the two horses and the chariot are the two wonderful horses of
obhar, ing of icily, which run eually well over land and sea
there are no other horses in the world like them, and no other vehicle
eual to the chariot.

And the seven pigs are the pigs of Easal, ing of the olden
Pillars though they may be killed every night, they are found alive
again the next day, and every person that eats part of them can never be
afflicted with any disease.

And the houndwhelp I claim is the houndwhelp of the ing of
Ioruaidhe her name is Failinis every wild beast she sees she
catches at once. It will not be easy for you to secure her.

The cookingspit which you must get for me is one of the cookingspits
of the women of the Island of Fianchuiv, which is at the bottom of
the sea, between Erin and Alba.

You have also pledged yourselves to give three shouts upon a hill. The
hill upon which they must be given is the hill called noc
iodhchaoin, in the north of Lochlann. iodhchaoin and his
sons do not allow shouts to be given on that hill besides this, it was
they who gave my father his military education, and, even if I were to
forgive you, they would not so that, though you achieve all the other
adventures, I think that you will fail in this one.

ow you know what sort of a fine it is that you have bargained to pay
me, said Lugh.

And fear and astonishment fell upon the sons of Tuirenn.

This tale is evidently the work of some ancient Irish storyteller who
wished to compile from various sources a more or less complete account
of how the aelic gods obtained their legendary possessions. The spear
of Pisear, ing of Persia, is obviously the same weapon as the lance of
Lugh, which another tradition describes as having been brought by the
Tuatha  anann from their original home in the city of orias
Failinis, the whelp of the ing of Ioruaidhe, is Lughs hound of
mightiest deeds, which was irresistible in battle, and which turned any
running water it bathed in into wine, a property here transferred
to the magic pigsskin of ing Tuis the seven swine of the ing of the
olden Pillars must be the same undying porkers from whose flesh
anannn mac Lir made the Feast of Age which preserved the eternal
youth of the gods it was with horses and chariot that ran along
the surface of the sea that anannn used to ourney to and fro between
Erin and the eltic Elysium in the West the apples that grew in
the arden of the esperides were surely of the same celestial growth as
those that fed the inhabitants of that immortal country while the
cookingspit reminds us of three such implements at Tara, made by
oibniu and associated with the names of the agda and the orrg.

The burden of collecting all these treasures was placed upon the
shoulders of the three sons of Tuirenn.

They consulted together, and agreed that they could never hope to
succeed unless they had anannns magic horse, plendid ane, and
anannns magic coracle, Wavesweeper. ut both these had been lent
by anannn to Lugh himself. o the sons of Tuirenn were obliged to
humble themselves to beg them from Lugh. The sungod would not lend them
the horse, for fear of making their task too easy, but he let them have
the boat, because he knew how much the spear of Pisear and the horses of
obhar would be needed in the coming war with the Fomors. They bade
farewell to their father, and went down to the shore and put out to sea,
taking their sister with them.

Which portion of the fine shall we seek first said the others to
rian. We will seek them in the order in which they were demanded, he
replied. o they directed the magic boat to sail to the arden of the
esperides, and presently they arrived there.

They landed at a harbour, and held a council of war. It was decided that
their best chance of obtaining three of the apples would be by taking
the shapes of hawks. Thus they would have strength enough in their claws
to carry the apples away, together with sufficient uickness upon the
wing to hope to escape the arrows, darts, and slingstones which would
be shot and hurled at them by the warders of the garden.

They swooped down upon the orchard from above. It was done so swiftly
that they carried off the three apples, unhit either by shaft or stone.
ut their difficulties were not yet over. The king of the country had
three daughters who were well skilled in witchcraft. y sorcery they
changed themselves into three ospreys, and pursued the three hawks. ut
the sons of Tuirenn reached the shore first, and, changing themselves
into swans, dived into the sea. They came up close to their coracle, and
got into it, and sailed swiftly away with the spoil.

Thus their first uest was finished, and they voyaged on to reece, to
seek the pigsskin of ing Tuis. o one could go without some excuse
into a kings court, so they decided to disguise themselves as poets,
and to tell the doorkeeper that they were professional bards from Erin,
seeking largess at the hands of kings. The porter let them into the
great hall, where the poets of reece were singing before the king.

When those had all finished, rian rose, and asked permission to show
his art. This was accorded and he sang

              Tuis, we conceal not thy fame.
              We praise thee as the oak above the kings
              The skin of a pig, bounty without hardness
              This is the reward which I ask for it.

             A stormy host and raging sea
              Are a dangerous power, should one oppose it.
              The skin of a pig, bounty without hardness
              This is the reward I ask,  Tuis.

That is a good poem, said the king, only I do not understand it.

I will explain it, said rian. We praise thee as the oak above the
kings this means that, as the oak excels all other trees, so do you
excel all other kings in nobility and generosity. The skin of a pig,
bounty without hardness that is a pigsskin which you have,  Tuis,
and which I should like to receive as the reward of my poem. A stormy
host and raging sea are a dangerous power, should one oppose it this
means to say, that we are not used to going without anything on which we
have set our hearts,  Tuis.

I should have liked your poem better, replied the king, if my
pigsskin had not been mentioned in it. It was not a wise thing for you
to have done,  poet. ut I will measure three fills of red gold out of
the skin, and you shall have those.

ay all good be thine,  ing answered rian. I knew that I should
get a noble reward.

o the king sent for the pigsskin to measure out the gold with. ut,
as soon as rian saw it, he seized it with his left hand, and slew the
man who was holding it, and Iuchar and Iucharba also hacked about them
and they cut their way down to the boat, leaving the ing of reece
among the dead behind them.

And now we will go and get ing Pisears spear, said rian. o,
leaving reece, they sailed in their coracle to Persia.

Their plan of disguising themselves as poets had served them so well
that they decided to make use of it again. o they went into the ing of
Persias hall in the same way as they had entered that of the ing of
reece. rian first listened to the poets of Persia singing then he
sang his own song

              mall the esteem of any spear with Pisear
               The battles of foes are broken
               o oppression to Pisear
               Everyone whom he wounds.

              A yewtree, the finest of the wood,
               It is called ing without opposition.
               ay that splendid shaft drive on
               Yon crowd into their wounds of death.

That is a good poem,  man of Erin, said the king, but why is my
spear mentioned in it

The meaning is this, replied rian I should like to receive that
spear as a reward for my poem.

You make a rash reuest, said the king. If I spare your life after
having heard it, it will be a sufficient reward for your poem.

rian had one of the magic apples in his hand, and he remembered its
boomeranglike uality. e hurled it full in the ing of Persias face,
dashing out his brains. The Persians flew to arms, but the three sons of
Tuirenn conuered them, and made them yield up the spear.

They had now to travel to icily, to obtain the horses and chariot of
ing obhar. ut they were afraid to go as poets this time, for fear the
fame of their deeds might have got abroad. They therefore decided to
pretend to be mercenary soldiers from Erin, and offer the ing of icily
their service. This, they thought, would be the easiest way of finding
out where the horses and the chariot were kept. o they went and stood
on the green before the royal court.

When the ing of icily heard that there had come mercenaries from Erin,
seeking wages from the kings of the world, he invited them to take
service with him. They agreed but, though they stayed with him a
fortnight and a month, they never saw the horses, or even found out
where they were kept. o they went to the king, and announced that they
wished to leave him.

Why he asked, for he did not want them to go.

We will tell you,  ing replied rian. It is because we have not
been honoured with your confidence, as we have been accustomed with
other kings. You have two horses and a chariot, the best in the world,
and we have not even been allowed to see them.

I would have shown them to you on the first day if you had asked me,
said the king and you shall see them at once, for I have seldom had
warriors with me so good as you are, and I do not wish you to leave me.

o he sent for the steeds, and had them yoked to the chariot, and the
sons of Tuirenn were witnesses of their marvellous speed, and how they
could run eually well over land or water.

rian made a sign to his brothers, and they watched their opportunity
carefully, and, as the chariot passed close beside them, rian leaped
into it, hurling its driver over the side. Then, turning the horses, he
struck ing obhar with Pisears spear, and killed him. e took his two
brothers up into the chariot and they drove away.

y the time the sons of Tuirenn reached the country of Easal, ing of
the Pillars of old, rumour had gone before them. The king came down to
the harbour to meet them, and asked them if it were really true that so
many kings had fallen at their hands. They replied that it was true, but
that they had no uarrel with any of them only they must obtain at all
costs the fine demanded by Lugh. Then Easal asked them why they had come
to his land, and they told him that they needed his seven pigs to add to
the tribute. o Easal thought it better to give them up, and to make
friends with the three sons of Tuirenn, than to fight with such
warriors. The sons of Tuirenn were very glad at this, for they were
growing weary of battles.

It happened that the ing of Ioruaidhe, who had the houndwhelp that
Lugh had demanded, was the husband of ing Easals daughter. Therefore
ing Easal did not wish that there should be fighting between him and
the three sons of Tuirenn. e proposed to rian and his brothers that he
should sail with them to Ioruaidhe, and try to persuade the king of the
country to give up the houndwhelp peacefully. They consented, and all
set foot safely on the delightful, wonderful shores of Ioruaidhe,
as the manuscript calls them. ut ing Easals soninlaw would not
listen to reason. e assembled his warriors, and fought but the sons of
Tuirenn defeated them, and compelled their king to yield up the
houndwhelp as the ransom for his life.

All these uests had been upon the earth, but the next was harder. o
coracle, not even anannns Wavesweeper, could penetrate to the
Island of Fianchuiv, in the depths of the sea that severs Erin from
Alba. o rian left his brothers, and put on his waterdress, with his
transparency of glass upon his headevidently an ancient Irish
anticipation of the modern divers dress. Thus euipped, he explored the
bottom of the sea for fourteen days before he found the island. ut when
at last he reached it, and entered the hall of its ueen, she and her
seamaidens were so amazed at rians hardihood in having penetrated to
their kingdom that they presented him with the cookingspit, and sent
him back safe.

y this time, Lugh had found out by his magic arts that the sons of
Tuirenn had obtained all the treasures he had demanded as the
bloodfine. e desired to get them safely into his own custody before
his victims went to give their three shouts upon iodhchaoins ill. e
therefore wove a druidical spell round them, so that they forgot the
rest of their task altogether, and sailed back to Erin. They searched
for Lugh, to give him the things, but he had gone away, leaving word
that they were to be handed over to uada, the Tuatha  anann king. As
soon as they were in safekeeping, Lugh came back to Tara and found the
sons of Tuirenn there. And he said to them

o you not know that it is unlawful to keep back any part of a
bloodfine o have you given those three shouts upon iodhchaoins
ill

Then the magic mist of forgetfulness fell from them, and they
remembered. orrowfully they went back to complete their task.

iodhchaoin himself was watching for them, and, when he saw them
land, he came down to the beach. rian attacked him, and they fought
with the swiftness of two bears and the ferocity of two lions until
iodhchaoin fell.

Then iodhchaoins three sonsorc, onn, and Aedhcame out to avenge
their father, and they drove their spears through the bodies of the
three sons of Tuirenn. ut the three sons of Tuirenn also drove their
spears through the bodies of the three sons of iodhchaoin.

The three sons of iodhchaoin were killed, and the three sons of Tuirenn
were so sorely wounded that birds might have flown through their bodies
from one side to the other. evertheless rian was still able to stand
upright, and he held his two brothers, one in each hand, and kept them
on their feet, and, all together, they gave three faint, feeble shouts.

Their coracle bore them, still living, to Erin. They sent their father
Tuirenn as a suppliant to Lugh, begging him to lend them the magic
pigsskin to heal their wounds.

ut Lugh would not, for he had counted upon their fight with the sons of
iodhchaoin to avenge his father ians death. o the children of
Tuirenn resigned themselves to die, and their father made a farewell
song over them and over himself, and died with them.

Thus ends that famous taleThe Fate of the ons of Tuirenn, known as
one of the Three orrowful tories of Erin.



Footnote 

  This story of the Fate of the hildren of Tuirenn is mentioned in
  the ninthcentury ormacs lossary. It is found in various Irish
  and cottish ., including the ook of Lecan. The present retelling
  is from Eugene urrys translation, published in Atlantis, ol.
  I.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, pp. .

Footnote 

  A part of ounty Louth, between the oyne and undalk. The heroic
  cycle connects it especially with uchulainn. Pronounced rthemna
  or rhevna.

Footnote 

  There is known to have been a hill called Ard hein ians ound in
  the district of uirthemne, and urry identifies it tentatively with
  one now called romslian.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Pzar.

Footnote 

  Pronounced obar.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Asal.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Irda.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Fincra.

Footnote 

  The ill cnoc of idkna.

Footnote 

  A mythical country inhabited by Fomors.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe ods Arrive.

Footnote 

  Ibid.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe ods Arrive.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe ods in Exile.

Footnote 

  Ibid.

Footnote 

  Petrie ist. and Anti. of Tara ill.

Footnote 

  The country seems to have been identified with orway or Iceland.

Footnote 

  Pronounced idkna.

Footnote 

  The other two are The Fate of the hildren of Lr, told in chap. I,
  and The Fate of the ons of snach, an episode of the eroic ycle,
  related in chap. III.






                               APTE I

                      TE WA WIT TE IAT


y this time the seven years of preparation had come to an end. A week
before the ay of amhain, the orrg discovered that the Fomors had
landed upon Erin. he at once sent a messenger to tell the agda, who
ordered his druids and sorcerers to go to the ford of the iver nius,
in ligo, and utter incantations against them.

The people of the goddess anu, however, were not yet uite ready for
battle. o the agda decided to visit the Fomorian camp as an
ambassador, and, by parleying with them, to gain a little more time. The
Fomors received him with apparent courtesy, and, to celebrate his
coming, prepared him a feast of porridge for it was wellknown how fond
he was of such food. They poured into their kings cauldron, which was
as deep as five giants fists, fourscore gallons of new milk, with meal
and bacon in proportion. To this they added the whole carcasses of
goats, sheep, and pigs they boiled the mixture together, and poured it
into a hole in the ground. ow, said they, if you do not eat it all,
we shall put you to death, for we will not have you go back to your own
people and say that the Fomors are inhospitable. ut they did not
succeed in frightening the agda. e took his spoon, which was so large
that two persons of our puny size might have reclined comfortably in the
middle of it, dipped it into the porridge, and fished up halves of
salted pork and uarters of bacon.

If it tastes as good as it smells, he said, it is good fare. And so
it proved for he ate it all, and scraped up even what remained at the
bottom of the hole. Then he went away to sleep it off, followed by the
laughter of the Fomors for his stomach was so swollen with food that he
could hardly walk. It was larger than the biggest cauldron in a large
house, and stood out like a sail before the wind.

ut the Fomors little practical oke upon the agda had given the
Tuatha  anann time to collect their forces. It was on the eve of
amhain that the two armies came face to face. Even then the Fomors
could not believe that the people of the goddess anu would offer them
much resistance.

o you think they will really dare to give us battle said ress to
Indech, the son of omnu. If they do not pay their tribute, we will
pound their bones for them, he replied.

The war of gods and giants naturally mirrored the warfare of the aels,
in whose battles, as in those of most semibarbarous people, single
combat figured largely. The main armies stood still, while, every day,
duels took place between ambitious combatants. ut no great warriors
either of the Tuatha  anann or of the Fomors took part in them.

ometimes a god, sometimes a giant would be the victor but there was a
difference in the net results that astonished the Fomors. If their own
swords and lances were broken, they were of no more use, and if their
own champions were killed, they never came back to life again but it
was uite otherwise with the people of the goddess anu. Weapons
shattered on one day reappeared upon the next in as good condition as
though they had never been used, and warriors slain on one day came back
upon the morrow unhurt, and ready, if necessary, to be killed again.

The Fomors decided to send someone to discover the secret of these
prodigies. The spy they chose was uadan, the son of ress and of
rigit, daughter of the agda, and therefore halfgiant and halfgod. e
disguised himself as a Tuatha  anann warrior, and went to look for
oibniu. e found him at his forge, together with Luchtain, the
carpenter, and redn, the bronzeworker. e saw how oibniu forged
lanceheads with three blows of his hammer, while Luchtain cut shafts
for them with three blows of his axe, and redn fixed the two parts
together so adroitly that his bronze nails needed no hammering in. e
went back and told the Fomors, who sent him again, this time to try and
kill oibniu.

e reappeared at the forge, and asked for a avelin. Without suspicion,
oibniu gave him one, and, as soon as he got it into his hand, he thrust
it through the smiths body. ut oibniu plucked it out, and, hurling it
back at his assailant, mortally wounded him. uadan went home to die,
and his father ress and his mother rigit mourned for him, inventing
for the purpose the Irish keening. oibniu, on the other hand, took no
harm. e went to the physician iancecht, who, with his daughter Airmid,
was always on duty at a miraculous well called the spring of health.
Whenever one of the Tuatha  anann was killed or wounded, he was
brought to the two doctors, who plunged him into the wonderworking
water, and brought him back to life and health again.

The mystic spring was not long, however, allowed to help the people of
the goddess. A young Fomorian chief, ctriallach son of Indech, found it
out. e and a number of his companions went to it by night, each
carrying a large stone from the bed of the iver rowes. These they
dropped into the spring, until they had filled it, dispersed the healing
water, and formed a cairn above it. Legend has identified this place by
the name of the airn of ctriallach.

This success determined the Fomors to fight a pitched battle. They drew
out their army in line. There was not a warrior in it who had not a coat
of mail and a helmet, a stout spear, a strong buckler, and a heavy
sword. Fighting the Fomors on that day, says the old author, could
only be compared to one of three thingsbeating ones head against a
rock, or plunging it into a fire, or putting ones hand into a serpents
nest.

All the great fighters of the Tuatha  anann were drawn out opposite
to them, except Lugh. A council of the gods had decided that his varied
accomplishments made his life too valuable to be risked in battle. They
had, therefore, left him behind, guarded by nine warriors. ut, at the
last moment, Lugh escaped from his warders, and appeared in his chariot
before the army. e made them a patriotic speech. Fight bravely, he
said, that your servitude may last no longer it is better to face
death than to live in vassalage and pay tribute. With these encouraging
words, he drove round the ranks, standing on tiptoe, so that all the
Tuatha  anann might see him.

The Fomors saw him too, and marvelled. It seems wonderful to me,
said ress to his druids, that the sun should rise in the west today
and in the east every other day. It would be better for us if it were
so, replied the druids. What else can it be, then asked ress. It
is the radiance of the face of Lugh of the Long Arms, said they.

Then the two armies charged each other with a great shout. pears and
lances smote against shields, and so great was the shouting of the
fighters, the shattering of shields, the clattering of swords, the
rattling of uivers, and the whistling of darts and avelins that it
seemed as if thunder rolled everywhere.

They fought so closely that the heads, hands, and feet of those on one
side were touching the heads, hands, and feet of those on the other
side they shed so much blood on to the ground that it became hard to
stand on it without slipping and the river of nsenn was filled with
dead bodies, so hard and swift and bloody and cruel was the battle.

any great chiefs fell on each side. gma, the champion of the Tuatha 
anann, killed Indech, the son of the goddess omnu. ut, meanwhile,
alor of the ighty lows raged among the gods, slaying their king,
uada of the ilver and, as well as acha, one of his warlike wives. At
last he met with Lugh. The sungod shouted a challenge to his
grandfather in the Fomorian speech. alor heard it, and prepared to use
his deathdealing eye.

Lift up my eyelid, he said to his henchmen, that I may see this
chatterer who talks to me.

The attendants lifted alors eye with a hook, and if the glance of the
eye beneath had rested upon Lugh, he would certainly have perished. ut,
when it was half opened, Lugh flung a magic stone which struck alors
eye out through the back of his head. The eye fell on the ground behind
alor, and destroyed a whole rank of thrice nine Fomors who were unlucky
enough to be within sight of it.

An ancient poem has handed down the secret of this magic stone. It is
there called a tathlum, meaning a concrete ball such as the ancient
Irish warriors used sometimes to make out of the brains of dead enemies
hardened with lime.

             A tathlum, heavy, fiery, firm,
              Which the Tuatha  anann had with them,
              It was that broke the fierce alors eye,
              f old, in the battle of the great armies.

             The blood of toads and furious bears,
              And the blood of the noble lion,
              The blood of vipers and of smuinns trunks
              It was of these the tathlum was composed.

             The sand of the swift Armorian sea,
              And the sand of the teeming ed ea
              All these, being first purified, were used
              In the composition of the tathlum.

             riun, the son of ethar, no mean warrior,
              Who on the oceans eastern border reigned
              It was he that fused, and smoothly formed,
              It was he that fashioned the tathlum.

             To the hero Lugh was given
              This concrete ball,no soft missile
              In ag Tuireadh of shrieking wails,
              From his hand he threw the tathlum.

This blinding of the terrible alor turned the fortunes of the fight
for the Fomors wavered, and the orrg came and encouraged the people
of the goddess anu with a song, beginning ings arise to the battle,
so that they took fresh heart, and drove the Fomors headlong back to
their country underneath the sea.

uch was the battle which is called in Irish ag Tuireadh na
bFomorach, that is to say, the Plain of the Towers of the Fomors,
and, more popularly, the attle of oytura the orthern, to
distinguish it from the other attle of oytura fought by the Tuatha 
anann against the Fir olgs farther to the south. ore of the Fomors
were killed in it, says the ancient manuscript, than there are stars in
the sky, grains of sand on the seashore, snowflakes in winter, drops
of dew upon the meadows in springtime, hailstones during a storm,
blades of grass trodden under horses feet, or anannn son of Lrs
white horses, the waves of the sea, when a tempest breaks. The towers
or pillars said to mark the graves of the combatants still stand upon
the plain of arrowmore, near ligo, and form, in the opinion of r.
Petrie, the finest collection of prehistoric monuments in the world,
with the sole exception of arnac, in rittany. egalithic
structures of almost every kind are found among themstone cairns with
dolmens in their interiors, dolmens standing open and alone, dolmens
surrounded by one, two, or three circles of stones, and circles without
dolmensto the number of over a hundred. ixtyfour of such prehistoric
remains stand together upon an elevated plateau not more than a mile
across, and make the battlefield of oytura, though the least known,
perhaps the most impressive of all primeval ruins. What they really
commemorated we may never know, but, in all probability, the place was
the scene of some important and decisive early battle, the monuments
marking the graves of the chieftains who were interred as the result of
it. Those which have been examined were found to contain burnt wood and
the halfburnt bones of men and horses, as well as implements of flint
and bone. The actors, therefore, were still in the eolithic Age.
Whether the horses were domesticated ones buried with their riders, or
wild ones eaten at the funeral feasts, it would be hard to decide. The
history of the real event must have been long lost even at the early
date when its relics were pointed out as the records of a battle between
the gods and the giants of aelic myth.

The Tuatha  anann, following the routed Fomors, overtook and captured
ress. e begged Lugh to spare his life.

What ransom will you pay for it asked Lugh.

I will guarantee that the cows of Ireland shall always be in milk,
promised ress.

ut, before accepting, Lugh took counsel with his druids.

What good will that be, they decided, if ress does not also lengthen
the lives of the cows

This was beyond the power of ress to do so he made another offer.

Tell your people, he said to Lugh, that, if they will spare my life,
they shall have a good wheat harvest every year.

ut they said We already have the spring to plough and sow in, the
summer to ripen the crops, the autumn for reaping, and the winter in
which to eat the bread and that is all we want.

Lugh told this to ress. ut he also said You shall have your life in
return for a much less service to us than that.

What is it asked ress.

Tell us when we ought to plough, when we ought to sow, and when we
ought to harvest.

ress replied You should plough on a Tuesday, sow on a Tuesday, and
harvest on a Tuesday.

And this lying maxim says the story saved resss life.

Lugh, the agda, and gma still pursued the Fomors, who had carried off
in their flight the agdas harp. They followed them into the submarine
palace where ress and Elathan lived, and there they saw the harp
hanging on the wall. This harp of the agdas would not play without its
owners leave. The agda sang to it

              ome, oak of the two cries
               ome, hand of fourfold music
               ome, summer ome, winter
               oice of harps, bellows, and flutes

For the agdas harp had these two names it was called ak of the two
cries and and of fourfold music.

It leaped down from the wall, killing nine of the Fomors as it passed,
and came into the agdas hand. The agda played to the Fomors the three
tunes known to all clever harpiststhe weepingtune, the laughingtune,
and the sleepingtune. While he played the weepingtune, they were bowed
with weeping while he played the laughingtune, they rocked with
laughter and when he played the sleepingtune, they all fell asleep.
And while they slept, Lugh, the agda, and gma got away safely.

ext, the agda brought the blackmaned heifer which he had, by the
advice of Angus son of the Young, obtained from ress. The wisdom of
Angus had been shown in this advice, for it was this very heifer that
the cattle of the people of the goddess anu were accustomed to follow,
whenever it lowed. ow, when it lowed, all the cattle which the Fomors
had taken away from the Tuatha  anann came back again.

Yet the power of the Fomors was not wholly broken. Four of them still
carried on a desultory warfare by spoiling the corn, fruit, and milk of
their conuerors. ut the orrg and adb and ider and Angus pursued
them, and drove them out of Ireland for ever.

Last of all, the orrg and adb went up on to the summits of all the
high mountains of Ireland, and proclaimed the victory. All the lesser
gods who had not been in the battle came round and heard the news. And
adb sang a song which began

                     Peace mounts to the heavens,
                      The heavens descend to earth,
                      Earth lies under the heavens,
                      Everyone is strong ...,

but the rest of it has been lost and forgotten.

Then she added a prophecy in which she foretold the approaching end of
the divine age, and the beginning of a new one in which summers would be
flowerless and cows milkless and women shameless and men strengthless,
in which there would be trees without fruit and seas without fish, when
old men would give false udgments and legislators make unust laws,
when warriors would betray one another, and men would be thieves, and
there would be no more virtue left in the world.



Footnote 

  This chapter is, with slight interpolations, based upon the arleian
  . in the ritish useum numbered , and called the econd attle
  of oytura, or rather from translations made of it by r. Whitley
  tokes, published in the evue eltiue, ol. II, and by . de
  ubainville in his Lpope eltiue en Irlande.

Footnote 

  I have interpolated this picturesue passage from the account of a
  fight between the Tuatha  anann and the Fomors in the Fate of the
  hildren of Tuirenn. urrys translation in Atlantis, ol. I.

Footnote 

  This translation was made by Eugene urry from an ancient vellum .
  formerly belonging to r. W. onck ason, but since sold by auction in
  London. ee his anners and ustoms of the Ancient Irish, Lecture
  II, p. .

Footnote 

  ee Fergusson ude tone onuments, pp. , c.

Footnote 

   agpipes.

Footnote 

  ook of Fermoy. ee evue eltiue, ol. I.The Ancient Irish
  oddess of War.






                               APTE 

                  TE ET F TE  Y TAL


f what adb had in mind when she uttered this prophecy we have no
record. ut it was true. The twilight of the Irish gods was at hand. A
new race was coming across the sea to dispute the ownership of Ireland
with the people of the goddess anu. And these newcomers were not
divinities like themselves, but men like ourselves, ancestors of the
aels.

This story of the conuest of the gods by mortalswhich seems such a
strange one to usis typically eltic. The aelic mythology is the only
one which has preserved it in any detail but the doctrine would seem to
have been common at one time to all the elts. It was, however, of less
shame to the gods than would otherwise have been for men were of as
divine descent as themselves. The dogma of the elts was that men were
descended from the god of death, and first came from the Land of the
ead to take possession of the present world. aesar tells us, in
his too short account of the auls, that they believed themselves to be
sprung from is Pater, the god of the underworld. In the aelic
mythology is Pater was called il, a name which has for root the
syllable bel, meaning to die. The god eli in ritish mythology was
no doubt the same person, while the same idea is expressed by the same
root in the name of alor, the terrible Fomor whose glance was
death.

The posthristian Irish chroniclers, seeking to reconcile hristian
teachings with the still vital pagan mythology by changing the gods into
ancient kings and incorporating them into the annals of the country,
with appropriate dates, also disposed of the genuine early doctrine by
substituting pain for ades, and giving a highlyfanciful account of
the origin and wanderings of their ancestors. To use a ibernicism,
appropriate in this connection, the first Irishman was a cythian called
Fenius Farsa. eprived of his own throne, he had settled in Egypt, where
his son iul married a daughter of the reigning Pharaoh. er name was
cta, and she had a son called oidel, whose greatgrandson was named
Eber cot, the whole genealogy being probably invented to explain the
origin of the three names by which the aels called themselvesFinn,
cot, and oidel. Fenius and his family and clan were turned out of
Egypt for refusing to oin in the persecution of the children of Israel,
and soourned in Africa for fortytwo years. Their wanderings took them
to the altars of the Philistines, by the Lake of siers then, passing
between usicada and the hilly country of yria, they travelled through
auretania as far as the Pillars of ercules and thence landed in
pain, where they lived many years, greatly increasing and multiplying.
The same route is given by the twelfthcentury ritish historian,
eoffrey of onmouth, as that taken by rutus and the Troans when they
came to colonize ritain. Its only connection with any kind of fact
is that it corresponds fairly well with what ethnologists consider must
have been the westward line of migration taken, not, curiously enough,
by the Aryan elts, but by the preAryan Iberians.

It is sufficient for us to find the first men in pain, remembering that
pain stood for the eltic ades, or Elysium. In this country regon,
the father of two sons, il and Ith, had built a watchtower, from
which, one winters evening, Ith saw, far off over the seas, a land he
had never noticed before. It is on winter evenings, when the air is
pure, that mans eyesight reaches farthest, remarks the old tract
called the ook of Invasions, gravely accounting for the fact
that Ith saw Ireland from pain.

Wishing to examine it nearer, he set sail with thrice thirty warriors,
and landed without mishap at the mouth of the iver cn. The
country seemed to him to be uninhabited, and he marched with his men
towards the north. At last he reached Aileach, near the present town of
Londonderry.

ere he found the three reigning kings of the people of the goddess
anu, ac uill, ac echt, and ac rein, the sons of gma, and
grandsons of the agda. These had succeeded uada the ilverhanded,
killed in the battle with the Fomors and had met, after burying their
predecessor in a tumulus called rianan Aileach, which still stands on
the base of the Inishowen Peninsula, between Lough willy and Lough
Foyle, to divide his kingdom among them. nable to arrive at any
partition satisfactory to all, they appealed to the newcomer to
arbitrate.

The advice of Ith was moral rather than practical. Act according to the
laws of ustice was all that he would say to the claimants and then he
was indiscreet enough to burst into enthusiastic praises of Ireland for
its temperate climate and its richness in fruit, honey, wheat, and fish.
uch sentiments from a foreigner seemed to the Tuatha  anann
suggestive of a desire to take the country from them. They conspired
together and treacherously killed Ith at a place since called Iths
Plain. They, however, spared his followers, who returned to pain,
taking their dead leaders body with them. The indignation there was
great, and il, ils son and Iths nephew, determined to go to
Ireland and get revenge.

il therefore sailed with his eight sons and their wives. Thirtysix
chiefs, each with his shipful of warriors, accompanied him. y the magic
arts of their druid, Amergin of the Fair nee, they discovered the exact
place at which Ith had landed before them, and put in to shore there.
Two alone failed to reach it alive. The wife of Amergin died during the
voyage, and Aranon, a son of il, on approaching the land, climbed to
the top of the mast to obtain a better view, and, falling off, was
drowned. The rest disembarked safely upon the first of ay.

Amergin was the first to land. Planting his right foot on Irish soil, he
burst into a poem preserved in both the ook of Lecan and the ook of
allymote. It is a good example of the pantheistic philosophy of
the eltic races, and a very close parallel to it is contained in an
early Welsh poem, called the attle of the Trees, and attributed to
the famous bard Taliesin. I am the wind that blows upon the sea,
sang Amergin I am the ocean wave I am the murmur of the surges I am
seven battalions I am a strong bull I am an eagle on a rock I am a
ray of the sun I am the most beautiful of herbs I am a courageous wild
boar I am a salmon in the water I am a lake upon a plain I am a
cunning artist I am a gigantic, swordwielding champion I can shift my
shape like a god. In what direction shall we go hall we hold our
council in the valley or on the mountaintop Where shall we make our
home What land is better than this island of the setting sun Where
shall we walk to and fro in peace and safety Who can find you clear
springs of water as I can Who can tell you the age of the moon but I
Who can call the fish from the depths of the sea as I can Who can cause
them to come near the shore as I can Who can change the shapes of the
hills and headlands as I can I am a bard who is called upon by
seafarers to prophesy. avelins shall be wielded to avenge our wrongs. I
prophesy victory. I end my song by prophesying all other good
things.

The Welsh bard Taliesin sings in the same strain as the druid Amergin
his unity with, and therefore his power over, all nature, animate and
inanimate. I have been in many shapes, he says, before I attained a
congenial form. I have been a narrow blade of a sword I have been a
drop in the air I have been a shining star I have been a word in a
book I have been a book in the beginning I have been a light in a
lantern a year and a half I have been a bridge for passing over
threescore rivers I have ourneyed as an eagle I have been a boat on
the sea I have been a director in battle I have been a sword in the
hand I have been a shield in fight I have been the string of a harp I
have been enchanted for a year in the foam of water. There is nothing in
which I have not been. It is strange to find ael and riton combining
to voice almost in the same words this doctrine of the mystical elts,
who, while still in a state of semibarbarism, saw, with some of the
greatest of ancient and modern philosophers, the ne in the any, and a
single Essence in all the manifold forms of life.

The ilesians for so, following the Irish annalists, it will be
convenient to call the first aelic settlers in Ireland began their
march on Tara, which was the capital of the Tuatha  anann, as it had
been in earlier days the chief fortress of the Fir olgs, and would in
later days be the dwelling of the high kings of Ireland. n their way
they met with a goddess called anba, the wife of ac uill. he greeted
Amergin. If you have come to conuer Ireland, she said, your cause is
no ust one. ertainly it is to conuer it we have come, replied
Amergin, without condescending to argue upon the abstract morality of
the matter. Then at least grant me one thing, she asked. What is
that replied Amergin. That this island shall be called by my name.
It shall be, replied Amergin.

A little farther on, they met a second goddess, Fotla, the wife of ac
echt, who made the same reuest, and received the same answer from
Amergin.

Last of all, at isnech, the centre of Ireland, they came upon the third
of the ueens, Eriu, the wife of ac rein. Welcome, warriors, she
cried. To you who have come from afar this island shall henceforth
belong, and from the setting to the rising sun there is no better land.
And your race will be the most perfect the world has ever seen. These
are fair words and a good prophecy, said Amergin. It will be no thanks
to you, broke in onn, ils eldest son. Whatever success we have we
shall owe to our own strength. That which I prophesy has no concern
with you, retorted the goddess, and neither you nor your descendants
will live to enoy this island. Then, turning to Amergin, she, too,
asked that Ireland might be called after her. It shall be its principal
name, Amergin promised.

And so it has happened. f the three ancient names of Irelandanba,
Fotla, and Eriuthe last, in its genitive form of Erinn, is the one
that has survived.

The invaders came to Tara, then called rumcain, that is, the eautiful
ill. ac uill, ac echt, and ac rein met them, with all the host
of the aelic gods. As was usual, they held a parley. The people of the
goddess anu complained that they had been taken by surprise, and the
ilesians admitted that to invade a country without having first warned
its inhabitants was not strictly according to the courtesies of
chivalrous warfare. The Tuatha  anann proposed to the invaders that
they should leave the island for three days, during which they
themselves would decide whether to fight for their kingdom or to
surrender it but the ilesians did not care for this, for they knew
that, as soon as they were out of the island, the Tuatha  anann would
oppose them with druidical enchantments, so that they would not be able
to make a fresh landing. In the end, ac uill, ac echt, and ac
rein offered to submit the matter to the arbitration of Amergin, the
ilesians own lawgiver, with the express stipulation that, if he gave
an obviously partial udgment, he was to suffer death at their hands.
onn asked his druid if he were prepared to accept this very delicate
duty. Amergin replied that he was, and at once delivered the first
udgment pronounced by the ilesians in Ireland.

 The men whom we found dwelling in the land, to them is possession due
    by right.
  It is therefore your duty to set out to sea over nine green waves
  And if you shall be able to effect a landing again in spite of them,
  You are to engage them in battle, and I adudge to you the land in
     which you found them living.
  I adudge to you the land wherein you found them dwelling, by the right
     of battle.
  ut although you may desire the land which these people possess, yet
     yours is the duty to show them ustice.
  I forbid you from inustice to those you have found in the land,
     however you may desire to obtain it.

This udgment was considered fair by both parties. The ilesians retired
to their ships, and waited at a distance of nine waves length from the
land until the signal was given to attack, while the Tuatha  anann,
drawn up upon the beach, were ready with their druidical spells to
oppose them.

The signal was given, and the ilesians bent to their oars. ut they had
hardly started before they discovered that a strong wind was blowing
straight towards them from the shore, so that they could make no
progress. At first they thought it might be a natural breeze, but onn
smelt magic in it. e sent a man to climb the mast of his ship, and see
if the wind blew as strong at that height as it did at the level of the
sea. The man returned, reporting that the air was uite still up
aloft. Evidently it was a druidical wind. ut Amergin soon coped with
it. Lifting up his voice, he invoked the Land of Ireland itself, a power
higher than the gods it sheltered.

                I invoke the land of Eriu
                 The shining, shining sea
                 The fertile, fertile hill
                 The wooded vale
                 The river abundant, abundant in water
                 The fishful, fishful lake

In such strain runs the original incantation, one of those magic
formulas whose power was held by ancient, and still is held by savage,
races to reside in their exact consecrated wording rather than in their
meaning. To us it sounds nonsense, and so no doubt it did to those who
put the old Irish mythical traditions into literary shape for a later
version expands and explains it as follows

     I implore that we may regain the land of Erin,
      We who have come over the lofty waves,
      This land whose mountains are great and extensive,
      Whose streams are clear and numerous,
      Whose woods abound with various fruit,
      Its rivers and waterfalls are large and beautiful,
      Its lakes are broad and widely spread,
      It abounds with fountains on elevated grounds
      ay we gain power and dominion over its tribes
      ay we have kings of our own ruling at Tara
      ay Tara be the regal residence of our many succeeding kings
      ay the ilesians be the conuerors of its people
      ay our ships anchor in its harbours
      ay they trade along the coast of Erin
      ay Eremon be its first ruling monarch
      ay the descendants of Ir and Eber be mighty kings
      I implore that we may regain the land of Erin,
                                  I implore

The incantation proved effectual. The Land of Ireland was pleased to be
propitious, and the druidical wind dropped down.

ut success was not uite so easy as they had hoped. anannn, son of
the sea and lord of headlands, shook his magic mantle at them, and
hurled a fresh tempest out over the deep. The galleys of the ilesians
were tossed helplessly on the waves many sank with their crews. onn
was among the lost, thus fulfilling Erius prophecy, and three other
sons of il also perished. In the end, a broken remnant, after long
beating about the coasts, came to shore at the mouth of the iver oyne.
They landed and Amergin, from the shore, invoked the aid of the sea as
he had already done that of the land.

                          ea full of fish
                           Fertile land
                           Fish swarming up
                           Fish there
                           nderwave bird
                           reat fish
                           rabs hole
                           Fish swarming up
                           ea full of fish

which, being interpreted like the preceding charm, seems to have meant

 ay the fishes of the sea crowd in shoals to the land for our use
  ay the waves of the sea drive forth to the shore abundance of fish
  ay the salmon swim abundantly into our nets
  ay all kinds of fish come plentifully to us from the sea
  ay its flatfishes also come in abundance
  This poem I compose at the seashore that fishes may swim in shoals to
     our coast.

Then, gathering their forces, they marched on the people of the goddess
anu.

Two battles were fought, the first in lenn Faisi, a valley of the
lieve ish ountains, south of Tralee, and the second at Tailtiu, now
called Telltown. In both, the gods were beaten. Their three kings were
killed by the three surviving sons of ilac uill by Eber, ac echt
by Eremon, and ac rein by the druid Amergin. efeated and
disheartened, they gave in, and, retiring beneath the earth, left the
surface of the land to their conuerors.

From this day begins the history of Ireland according to the annalists.
ils eldest son, onn, having perished, the kingdom fell by right to
the second, Eremon. ut Eber, the third son, backed by his followers,
insisted upon a partition, and Ireland was divided into two eual parts.
At the end of a year, however, war broke out between the brothers Eber
was killed in battle, and Eremon took the sole rule.



Footnote 

  It may be noted that, according to Welsh legend, the ancestors of the
  ymri came from wld yr v, the Land of ummer, i.e. the eltic
  ther World.

Footnote 

  e ello allico, ook I, chap. III.

Footnote 

  e ubainville ycle ythologiue, chap. . hys ibbert
  LecturesThe aulish Pantheon.

Footnote 

  eoffrey of onmouths istoria ritonum, ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  ontained in the ook of Leinster and other ancient manuscripts.

Footnote 

  ow called the enmare iver.

Footnote 

  This poem and the three following ones, all attributed to Amergin, are
  said to be the oldest Irish literary records.

Footnote 

  ook of Taliesin, poem III, in kenes Four Ancient ooks of Wales,
  ol. I, p. .

Footnote 

  e ubainville ycle ythologiue. ee also the Transactions of
  the ssianic ociety, ol. .

Footnote 

  Translated by Professor wen onnellan in ol.  of the Transactions
  of the ssianic ociety.

Footnote 

  The original versions of this and the following charm are from e
  ubainville ycle ythologiue Irlandais, the later from Professor
  wen onnellans translations in ol.  of the Transactions of the
  ssianic ociety. ome of these poems, explains the Professor,
  have been glossed by writers or commentators of the iddle Ages,
  without which it would be almost impossible now for any Irish scholar
  to interpret them and it is proper to remark that the translation
  accompanying them is more in accordance with this gloss than with the
  original text.






                               APTE I

                           TE  I EILE


ut though mortals had conuered gods upon a scale unparalleled in
mythology, they had by no means entirely subdued them. eaten in battle,
the people of the goddess anu had yet not lost their divine attributes,
and could use them either to help or hurt. reat was the power of the
agda, says a tract preserved in the ook of Leinster, over the sons
of il, even after the conuest of Ireland for his subects destroyed
their corn and milk, so that they must needs make a treaty of peace with
the agda. ot until then, and thanks to his goodwill, were they able
to harvest corn and drink the milk of their cows. The basis of
this lost treaty seems to have been that the Tuatha  anann, though
driven from the soil, should receive homage and offerings from their
successors. We are told in the verse dinnsenchus of ag lecht, that

           ince the rule
            f Eremon, the noble man of grace,
            There was worshipping of stones
            ntil the coming of good Patrick of acha.

ispossessed of upper earth, the gods had, however, to seek for new
homes. A council was convened, but its members were divided between two
opinions. ne section of them chose to shake the dust of Ireland off its
disinherited feet, and seek refuge in a paradise overseas, situate in
some unknown, and, except for favoured mortals, unknowable island of the
west, the counterpart in aelic myth of the ritish

                      ... islandvalley of Avilion
            Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
            or ever wind blows loudly but it lies
            eepmeadowd, happy, fair with orchardlawns
            And bowery hollows crownd with summer sea

a land of perpetual pleasure and feasting, described variously as the
Land of Promise Tir Tairngir, the Plain of appiness ag
ell, the Land of the Living Tirnambeo, the Land of the
Young Tirnang, and reasals Island yreasail. eltic
mythology is full of the beauties and wonders of this mystic country,
and the tradition of it has never died out. yreasail has been set
down on old maps as a reality again and again some pioneers in the
panish seas thought they had discovered it, and called the land they
found razil and it is still said, by lovers of old lore, that a
patient watcher, after long gazing westward from the westernmost shores
of Ireland or cotland, may sometimes be lucky enough to catch a glimpse
against the sunset of its

      summer isles of Eden lying in darkpurple spheres of sea.

f these divine emigrants the principal was anannn son of Lr. ut,
though he had cast in his lot beyond the seas, he did not cease to visit
Ireland. An old Irish king, ran, the son of Febal, met him, according
to a seventhcentury poem, as ran ourneyed to, and anannn from, the
earthly paradise. ran was in his boat, and anannn was driving a
chariot over the tops of the waves, and he sang

         ran deems it a marvellous beauty
          In his coracle across the clear sea
          While to me in my chariot from afar
          It is a flowery plain on which he rides about.

         What is a clear sea
          For the prowed skiff in which ran is,
          That is a happy plain with profusion of flowers
          To me from the chariot of two wheels.

         ran sees
          The number of waves beating across the clear sea
          I myself see in ag on
          edheaded flowers without fault.

         eahorses glisten in summer
          As far as ran has stretched his glance
          ivers pour forth a stream of honey
          In the land of anannn son of Lr.

         The sheen of the main, on which thou art,
          The white hue of the sea, on which thou rowest about,
          Yellow and azure are spread out,
          It is land, and is not rough.

         peckled salmon leap from the womb
          f the white sea, on which thou lookest
          They are calves, they are coloured lambs
          With friendliness, without mutual slaughter.

         Though but one chariotrider is seen
          In ag ell of many flowers,
          There are many steeds on its surface,
          Though them thou seest not.

                                                 

         Along the top of a wood has swum
          Thy coracle across ridges,
          There is a wood of beautiful fruit
          nder the prow of thy little skiff.

         A wood with blossom and fruit,
          n which is the vines veritable fragrance
          A wood without decay, without defect,
          n which are leaves of a golden hue.

And, after this singularly poetical enunciation of the philosophical and
mystical doctrine that all things are, under their diverse forms,
essentially the same, he goes on to describe to ran the beauties and
pleasures of the eltic Elysium.

ut there were othersindeed, the most partof the gods who refused to
expatriate themselves. For these residences had to be found, and the
agda, their new king, proceeded to assign to each of those who stayed
in Ireland a sdh. These sdhe were barrows, or hillocks, each being
the door to an underground realm of inexhaustible splendour and delight,
according to the somewhat primitive ideas of the elts. A description is
given of one which the agda kept for himself, and out of which his son
Angus cheated him, which will serve as a fair example of all. There were
appletrees there always in fruit, and one pig alive and another ready
roasted, and the supply of ale never failed. ne may still visit in
Ireland the sdhe of many of the gods, for the spots are known, and
the traditions have not died out. To Lr was given dh
Fionnachaidh, now known as the ill of the White Field, on the
top of lieve Fuad, near ewtown amilton, in ounty Armagh. odb erg
received a sdh called by his own name, dh odb, ust to the
south of Portumna, in alway. ider was given the sdh of ri Leith,
now called lieve olry, near Ardagh, in ounty Longford. gmas sdh
was called Airceltrai to Lugh was assigned odrubn anannns
son, Ilbhreach, received dh Eas Aedha uaidh, now the ound of
ullachshee, near allyshannon, in onegal Fionnbharr had dh
eadha, now nockma, about five miles west of Tuam, where, as present
king of the fairies, he is said to live today while the abodes of
other gods of lesser fame are also recorded. For himself the agda
retained two, both near the iver oyne, in eath, the best of them
being the famous rughnaoyne. one of the members of the Tuatha 
anann were left unprovided for, save one.

It was from this time that the aelic gods received the name by which
the peasantry know them todayAes dhe, the People of the ills,
or, more shortly, the dhe. Every god, or fairy, is a
Ferdhe, a an of the ill and every goddess a eandhe,
a Woman of the ill, the banshee of popular legend.

The most famous of such fairy hills are about five miles from
rogheda. They are still connected with the names of the Tuatha 
anann, though they are now not called their dwellingplaces, but their
tombs. n the northern bank of the oyne stand seventeen barrows, three
of whichnowth, owth, and ew rangeare of great size. The last
named, largest, and best preserved, is over  feet in diameter, and 
feet high, while its top makes a platform  feet across. It has been
explored, and oman coins, gold torues, copper pins, and iron rings and
knives have been found in it but what else it may have once contained
will never be known, for, like nowth and owth, it was thoroughly
ransacked by anish spoilers in the ninth century. It is entered by a
suare doorway, the rims of which are elaborately ornamented with a kind
of spiral pattern. This entrance leads to a stone passage, more than 
feet long, which gradually widens and rises, until it opens into a
chamber with a conical dome  feet high. n each side of this central
chamber is a recess, with a shallow oval stone basin in it. The huge
slabs of which the whole is built are decorated upon both the outer and
the inner faces with the same spiral pattern as the doorway.

The origin of these astonishing prehistoric monuments is unknown, but
they are generally attributed to the race that inhabited Ireland before
the elts. azing at marvellous ew range, one might very well echo the
words of the old Irish poet ac ia, in the ook of allymote

          ehold the dh before your eyes,
           It is manifest to you that it is a kings mansion,
           Which was built by the firm agda,
           It was a wonder, a court, an admirable hill.

It is not, however, with ew range, or even with nowth or owth, that
the agdas name is now associated. It is a smaller barrow, nearer to
the oyne, which is known as the Tomb of the agda. It has never been
opened, and r. ames Fergusson, the author of ude tone onuments,
who holds the Tuatha  anann to have been a real people, thinks that
the bones and armour of the great agda may still be found in his
honoured grave. ther eltic scholars might not be so sanguine,
though verses as old as the eleventh century assert that the Tuatha 
anann used the brughs for burial. It was about this period that the
mythology of Ireland was being rewoven into spurious history. The poem,
which is called the hronicles of the Tombs, not only mentions the
onument of the agda and the onument of the orrg, but also
records the last restingplaces of gma, Etain, airpr, Lugh, oann,
and Angus.

We have for the present, however, to consider Angus in a far less
sepulchral light. e is, indeed, very much alive in the story to be
related. The on of the Young was absent when the distribution of the
sdhe was made. When he returned, he came to his father, the agda,
and demanded one. The agda pointed out to him that they had all been
given away. Angus protested, but what could be done y fair means,
evidently nothing but by craft, a great deal. The wily Angus appeared
to reconcile himself to fate, and only begged his father to allow him to
stay at the sdh of rughnaoyne ew range for a day and a night.
The agda agreed to this, no doubt congratulating himself on having got
out of the difficulty so easily. ut when he came to Angus to remind him
that the time was up, Angus refused to go. e had been granted, he
claimed, day and night, and it is of days and nights that time and
eternity are composed therefore there was no limit to his tenure of the
sdh. The logic does not seem very convincing to our modern minds, but
the agda is said to have been satisfied with it. e abandoned the best
of his two palaces to his son, who took peaceable possession of it. Thus
it got a second name, that of the dh or rugh of the on of the
Young.

The agda does not, after this, play much active part in the history of
the people of the goddess anu. We next hear of a council of gods to
elect a fresh ruler. There were five candidates for the vacant
throneodb the ed, ider, Ilbhreach son of anannn, Lr, and
Angus himself, though the lastnamed, we are told, had little real
desire to rule, as he preferred a life of freedom to the dignities of
kingship. The Tuatha  anann went into consultation, and the result of
their deliberation was that their choice fell upon odb the ed, for
three reasonsfirstly, for his own sake secondly, for his father, the
agdas sake and thirdly, because he was the agdas eldest son. The
other competitors approved this choice, except two. ider refused to
give hostages, as was the custom, to odb erg, and fled with his
followers to a desert country round ount Leinster, in ounty arlow,
while Lr retired in great anger to dh Fionnachaidh, declining to
recognize or obey the new king.

Why Lr and ider should have so taken the matter to heart is difficult
to understand, unless it was because they were both among the oldest of
the gods. The indifference of Angus is easier to explain. e was the
aelic Eros, and was busy living up to his character. At this time, the
obect of his love was a maiden who had visited him one night in a
dream, only to vanish when he put out his arms to embrace her. All the
next day, we are told, Angus took no food. pon the following night, the
unsubstantial lady again appeared, and played and sang to him. That
following day, he also fasted. o things went on for a year, while Angus
pined and wasted for love. At last the physicians of the Tuatha 
anann guessed his complaint, and told him how fatal it might be to him.
Angus asked that his mother oann might be sent for, and, when she came,
he told her his trouble, and implored her help. he went to the agda
and begged him, if he did not wish to see his son die of unreuited
love, a disease that all iancechts medicine and oibnius magic could
not heal, to find the dreammaiden. The agda could do nothing himself,
but he sent to odb the ed, and the new king of the gods sent in turn
to the lesser deities of Ireland, ordering all of them to search for
her. For a year she could not be found, but at last the disconsolate
lover received a message, charging him to come and see if he could
recognize the lady of his dreams. Angus came, and knew her at once, even
though she was surrounded by thrice fifty attendant nymphs. er name was
aer, and she was the daughter of Etal Ambuel, who had a sdh at
aman, in onnaught. odb the ed demanded her for Angus in marriage,
but her father declared that he had no control over her. he was a
swanmaiden, he said and every year, as soon as summer was over, she
went with her companions to a lake called ragonouth, and there all
of them became swans. ut, refusing to be thus put off, Angus waited in
patience until the day of the magical change, and then went down to the
shore of the lake. There, surrounded by thrice fifty swans, he saw aer,
herself a swan surpassing all the rest in beauty and whiteness. e
called to her, proclaiming his passion and his name, and she promised to
be his bride, if he too would become a swan. e agreed, and with a word
she changed him into swanshape, and thus they flew side by side to
Anguss sdh, where they retook the human form, and, no doubt, lived
happily as long as could be expected of such changeable immortals as
pagan deities.

eanwhile, the people of the goddess anu were ustly incensed against
both Lr and ider. odb the ed made a yearly war upon ider in his
sdh, and many of the divine race were killed on either side. ut
against Lr, the new king of the gods refused to move, for there had
been a great affection between them. any times odb erg tried to
regain Lrs friendship by presents and compliments, but for a long time
without success.

At last Lrs wife died, to the seagods great sorrow. When odb the
ed heard the news, he sent a messenger to Lr, offering him one of his
own fosterdaughters, Aebh, Aeife, and Ailbhe, the
children of Ailioll of Arran. Lr, touched by this, came to visit odb
the ed at his sdh, and chose Aebh for his wife. he is the eldest,
so she must be the noblest of them, he said. They were married, and a
great feast made and Lr took her back with him to dh Fionnachaidh.

Aebh bore four children to Lr. The eldest was a daughter called Finola,
the second was a son called Aed the two others were twin boys called
Fiachra and onn, but in giving birth to those Aebh died.

odb the ed then offered Lr another of his fosterchildren, and he
chose the second, Aeife. Every year Lr and Aeife and the four children
used to go to anannns Feast of Age, which was held at each of the
sdhe in turn. The four children grew up to be great favourites among
the people of the goddess anu.

ut Aeife was childless, and she became ealous of Lrs children for
she feared that he would love them more than he did her. he brooded
over this until she began, first to hope for, and then to plot their
deaths. he tried to persuade her servants to murder them, but they
would not. o she took the four children to Lake arvra now called
Lough erravargh in West eath, and sent them into the water to bathe.
Then she made an incantation over them, and touched them, each in turn,
with a druidical wand, and changed them into swans.

ut, though she had magic enough to alter their shapes, she had not the
power to take away their human speech and minds. Finola turned, and
threatened her with the anger of Lr and of odb the ed when they came
to hear of it. he, however, hardened her heart, and refused to undo
what she had done. The children of Lr, finding their case a hopeless
one, asked her how long she intended to keep them in that condition.

You would be easier in mind, she said, if you had not asked the
uestion but I will tell you. You shall be three hundred years here, on
Lake arvra and three hundred years upon the ea of oyle, which
is between Erin and Alba and three hundred years more at Irros
omnann and the Isle of lora in Erris. Yet you shall have two
consolations in your troubles you shall keep your human minds, and yet
suffer no grief at knowing that you have been changed into swans, and
you shall be able to sing the softest and sweetest songs that were ever
heard in the world.

Then Aeife went away and left them. he returned to Lr, and told him
that the children had fallen by accident into Lake arvra, and were
drowned.

ut Lr was not satisfied that she spoke the truth, and went in haste to
the lake, to see if he could find traces of them. e saw four swans
close to the shore, and heard them talking to one another with human
voices. As he approached, they came out of the water to meet him. They
told him what Aeife had done, and begged him to change them back into
their own shapes. ut Lrs magic was not so powerful as his wifes, and
he could not.

or even could odb the edto whom Lr went for help,for all that he
was king of the gods. What Aeife had done could not be undone. ut she
could be punished for it odb ordered his fosterdaughter to appear
before him, and, when she came, he put an oath on her to tell him truly
what shape of all others, on the earth, or above the earth, or beneath
the earth, she most abhorred, and into which she most dreaded to be
transformed. Aeife was obliged to answer that she most feared to become
a demon of the air. o odb the ed struck her with his wand, and she
fled from them, a shrieking demon.

All the Tuatha  anann went to Lake arvra to visit the four swans.
The ilesians heard of it, and also went for it was not till long after
this that gods and mortals ceased to associate. The visit became a
yearly feast. ut, at the end of three hundred years, the children of
Lr were compelled to leave Lake arvra, and go to the ea of oyle, to
fulfil the second period of their exile.

They bade farewell to gods and men, and went. And, for fear lest they
might be hurt by anyone, the ilesians made it law in Ireland that no
man should harm a swan, from that time forth for ever.

The children of Lr suffered much from tempest and cold on the stormy
ea of oyle, and they were very lonely. nce only during that long
three hundred years did they see any of their friends. An embassy of the
Tuatha  anann, led by two sons of odb the ed, came to look for
them, and told them all that had happened in Erin during their exile.

At last that long penance came to an end, and they went to Irros omnann
and Innis lora for their third stage. And while it was wearily dragging
through, aint Patrick came to Ireland, and put an end to the power of
the gods for ever. They had been banned and banished when the children
of Lr found themselves free to return to their old home. dh
Fionnechaidh was empty and deserted, for Lr had been killed by aoilt,
the cousin of Finn mac oul.

o, after long, vain searching for their lost relatives, they gave up
hope, and returned to the Isle of lora. They had a friend there, the
Lonely rane of Inniskea, which has lived upon that island ever
since the beginning of the world, and will be still sitting there on the
day of udgment. They saw no one else until, one day, a man came to the
island. e told them that he was aint aemhoc, and that he had
heard their story. e brought them to his church, and preached the new
faith to them, and they believed on hrist, and consented to be
baptised. This broke the pagan spell, and, as soon as the holy water was
sprinkled over them, they returned to human shape. ut they were very
old and bowedthree aged men and an ancient woman. They did not live
long after this, and aint aemhoc, who had baptised them, buried them
all together in one grave.

ut, in telling this story, we have leaped nine hundred yearsa great
space in the history even of gods. We must retrace our steps, if not
uite to the days of Eremon and Eber, sons of il, and first kings of
Ireland, at any rate to the beginning of the hristian era.

At this time Eochaid Airem was high king of Ireland, and reigned at
Tara while, under him, as vassal monarchs, onchobar mac essa ruled
over the ed ranch hampions of lster uroi son of aire, was
king of unster esgegra was king of Leinster and Ailell, with his
famous ueen, edb, governed onnaught.

hortly before, among the gods, Angus on of the Young, had stolen away
Etain, the wife of ider. e kept her imprisoned in a bower of glass,
which he carried everywhere with him, never allowing her to leave it,
for fear ider might recapture her. The aelic Pluto, however, found out
where she was, and was laying plans to rescue her, when a rival of
Etains herself decoyed Angus away from before the pleasant
prisonhouse, and set his captive free. ut, instead of returning her to
ider, she changed the luckless goddess into a fly, and threw her into
the air, where she was tossed about in great wretchedness at the mercy
of every wind.

At the end of seven years, a gust blew her on to the roof of the house
of Etair, one of the vassals of onchobar, who was celebrating a feast.
The unhappy fly, who was Etain, was blown down the chimney into the room
below, and fell, exhausted, into a golden cup full of beer, which the
wife of the master of the house was ust going to drink. And the woman
drank Etain with the beer.

ut, of course, this was not the end of herfor the gods cannot really
die,but only the beginning of a new life. Etain was reborn as the
daughter of Etairs wife, no one knowing that she was not of mortal
lineage. he grew up to be the most beautiful woman in Ireland.

When she was twenty years old, her fame reached the high king, who sent
messengers to see if she was as fair as men reported. They saw her, and
returned to the king full of her praises. o Eochaid himself went to pay
her a visit. e chose her to be his ueen, and gave her a splendid
dowry.

It was not till then that ider heard of her. e came to her in the
shape of a young man, beautifully dressed, and told her who she really
was, and how she had been his wife among the people of the goddess anu.
e begged her to leave the king, and come with him to his sdh at ri
Leith. ut Etain refused with scorn.

o you think, she said, that I would give up the high king of Ireland
for a person whose name and kindred I do not know, except from his own
lips

The god retired, baffled for the time. ut one day, as ing Eochaid sat
in his hall, a stranger entered. e was dressed in a purple tunic, his
hair was like gold, and his eyes shone like candles.

The king welcomed him.

ut who are you he asked for I do not know you.

Yet I have known you a long time, returned the stranger.

Then what is your name

ot a very famous one. I am ider of ri Leith.

Why have you come here

To challenge you to a game of chess.

I am a good chessplayer, replied the king, who was reputed to be the
best in Ireland.

I think I can beat you, answered ider.

ut the chessboard is in the ueens room, and she is asleep,
obected Eochaid.

It does not matter, replied ider. I have brought a board with me
which can be in no way worse than yours.

e showed it to the king, who admitted that the boast was true. The
chessboard was made of silver set in precious stones, and the pieces
were of gold.

Play said ider to the king.

I never play without a wager, replied Eochaid.

What shall be the stake asked ider.

I do not care, replied Eochaid.

ood returned ider. Let it be that the loser pays whatever the
winner demands.

That is a wager fit for a king, said Eochaid.

They played, and ider lost. The stake that Eochaid claimed from him was
that ider and his subects should make a road through Ireland. Eochaid
watched the road being made, and noticed how iders followers yoked
their oxen, not by the horns, as the aels did, but at the shoulders,
which was better. e adopted the practice, and thus got his nickname,
Airem, that is, The Ploughman.

After a year, ider returned and challenged the king again, the terms to
be the same as before. Eochaid agreed with oy but, this time, he lost.

I could have beaten you before, if I had wished, said ider, and now
the stake I demand is Etain, your ueen.

The astonished king, who could not for shame go back upon his word,
asked for a years delay. ider agreed to return upon that day year to
claim Etain. Eochaid consulted with his warriors, and they decided to
keep watch through the whole of the day fixed by ider, and let no one
pass in or out of the royal palace till sunset. For Eochaid held that if
the fairy king could not get Etain upon that one day, his promise would
be no longer binding on him.

o, when the day came, they barred the door and guarded it, but suddenly
they saw ider among them in the hall. e stood beside Etain, and sang
this song to her, setting out the pleasures of the homes of the gods
under the enchanted hills.

        fair lady will you come with me
        To a wonderful country which is mine,
        Where the peoples hair is of golden hue,
        And their bodies the colour of virgin snow

       There no grief or care is known
        White are their teeth, black their eyelashes
        elight of the eye is the rank of our hosts,
        With the hue of the foxglove on every cheek.

       rimson are the flowers of every mead,
        racefully speckled as the blackbirds egg
        Though beautiful to see be the plains of Inisfail
        They are but commons compared to our great plains.

       Though intoxicating to you be the aledrink of Inisfail,
        ore intoxicating the ales of the great country
        The only land to praise is the land of which I speak,
        Where no one ever dies of decrepit age.

       oft sweet streams traverse the land
        The choicest of mead and of wine
        eautiful people without any blemish
        Love without sin, without wickedness.

       We can see the people upon all sides,
        ut by no one can we be seen
        The cloud of Adams transgression it is
        That prevents them from seeing us.

        lady, should you come to my brave land,
        It is golden hair that will be on your head
        Fresh pork, beer, new milk, and ale,
        You there with me shall have,  fair lady

Then ider greeted Eochaid, and told him that he had come to take away
Etain, according to the kings wager. And, while the king and his
warriors looked on helplessly, he placed one arm round the now willing
woman, and they both vanished. This broke the spell that hung over
everyone in the hall they rushed to the door, but all they could see
were two swans flying away.

The king would not, however, yield to the god. e sent to every part of
Ireland for news of Etain, but his messengers all came back without
having been able to find her. At last, a druid named aln learned, by
means of ogams carved upon wands of yew, that she was hidden under
iders sdh of ri Leith. o Eochaid marched there with an army, and
began to dig deep into the abode of the gods of which the fairy hill
was the portal. ider, as terrified as was the reek god ades when it
seemed likely that the earth would be rent open, and his domains
laid bare to the sight, sent out fifty fairy maidens to Eochaid, every
one of them having the appearance of Etain. ut the king would only be
content with the real Etain, so that ider, to save his sdh, was at
last obliged to give her up. And she lived with the ing of Ireland
after that until the death of both of them.

ut ider never forgave the insult. e bided his time for three
generations, until Eochaid and Etain had a male descendant. For they had
no son, but only a daughter called Etain, like her mother, and this
second Etain had a daughter called essbuachallo, who had a son called
onair, surnamed the reat. ider and the gods wove the web of fate
round onair, so that he and all his men died violent deaths.



Footnote 

  e ubainville ycle ythologiue Irlandais, p. .

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe eligion of the Ancient ritons and ruidism.

Footnote 

  Tennyson Idylls of the ing The Passing of Arthur.

Footnote 

  ee Woodartin Traces of the Elder Faiths of Ireland, ol I, pp.
  .

Footnote 

  The following verses are taken from r. uno eyers translation of
  the romance entitled The oyage of ran, on of Febal, published in
  r. utts rimm Library, ol. I.

Footnote 

  The Plain of ports.

Footnote 

  The appy Plain.

Footnote 

  Pronounced hee Finneha.

Footnote 

  Pronounced hee ove.

Footnote 

  Pronounced hee Assaroe.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Finnvar.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Farshee.

Footnote 

  urry Lectures on the . aterials of Ancient Irish istory,
  Appendix, p. .

Footnote 

  ee Fergusson ude tone onuments, pp. .

Footnote 

  urry . aterials, p. .

Footnote 

  Fergusson ude tone onuments, p. .

Footnote 

  This story is contained in the ook of Leinster.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Ilbrec.

Footnote 

  This story, called the ream of Angus, will be found translated into
  English by r. Edward ller in ol. III. of the evue eltiue,
  from an eighteenthcentury . in the ritish useum.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Aive.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Aiva.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Alva.

Footnote 

  ow called orth hannel.

Footnote 

  The Peninsula of Erris, in ayo.

Footnote 

  A small island off enmullet.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IFinn and the Fenians.

Footnote 

  An island off the coast of ayo. Its lonely crane was one of the
  Wonders of Ireland, and is still an obect of folkbelief.

Footnote 

  Pronounced emoc.

Footnote 

  This famous story of the Fate of the hildren of Lr is not found in
  any . earlier than the beginning of the seventeenth century. A
  translation of it has been published by Eugene urry in Atlantis,
  ol. I, from which the present abridgment is made.

Footnote 

  Pronounced ara.

Footnote 

  A poetical name for Ireland.

Footnote 

  Translated by urry, anners and ustoms of the Ancient Irish,
  Lecture I, p. , .

Footnote 

  Iliad, ook .

Footnote 

  The story of iders revenge and onairs death is told in the
  romance ruidhen  erga, The estruction of a ergas Fort,
  translated by r. Whitley tokes, Eugene urry, and Professor immer
  from the original text.






                              APTE II

                            TE II ILIA


With Eber and Eremon, sons of il, and conuerors of the gods, begins a
fresh series of characters in aelic traditionthe early ilesian
kings of Ireland. Though monkish chroniclers have striven to find
history in the legends handed down concerning them, they are none the
less almost as mythical as the Tuatha  anann. The first of them who
has the least appearance of reality is Tigernmas, who is recorded to
have reigned a hundred years after the coming of the ilesians. e seems
to have been what is sometimes called a ultureking, bearing much the
same kind of relation to Ireland as Theseus bore to Athens or inos to
rete. uring his reign, nine new lakes and three new rivers broke forth
from beneath the earth to give their waters to Erin. nder his auspices,
gold was first smelted, ornaments of gold and silver were first made,
and clothes first dyed. e is said to have perished mysteriously
with threefourths of the men of Erin while worshipping romm ruaich on
the field of ag lecht. In him r. utt sees, no doubt rightly, the
great mythical king who, in almost all national histories, closes the
strictly mythological age, and inaugurates a new era of less obviously
divine, if hardly less apocryphal characters.

In spite, however, of the worship of the Tuatha  anann instituted by
Eremon, we find the early kings and heroes of Ireland walking very
familiarly with their gods. Eochaid Airem, high king of Ireland, was
apparently reckoned a perfectly fit suitor for the goddess Etain, and
proved a far from unsuccessful rival of ider, the aelic Pluto.
And adventures of love or war were carried uite as cheerfully among the
sdh dwellers by Eochaids contemporariesonchobar son of essa, ing
of lster, uroi son of aire, ing of unster, esgegra, ing of
Leinster, and Ailell and edb, ing and ueen of onnaught.

All these figures of the second aelic cycle that of the heroes of
lster, and especially of their great champion, uchulainn lived,
according to Irish tradition, at about the beginning of the hristian
era. onchobar, indeed, is said to have expired in a fit of rage on
hearing of the death of hrist.

ut this is a very transparent monkish interpolation into the original
story. A uite different view is taken by most modern scholars, who
would see gods and not men in all the legendary characters of the eltic
heroic cycles. pon such a subect, however, one may legitimately take
sides. Were ing onchobar and his ltonian champions, Finn and his
Fenians, Arthur and his nights once living men round whom the
attributes of gods have gathered, or were they ancient deities renamed
and stripped of some of their divinity to make them more akin to their
human worshippers istory or mythology A mingling, perhaps, of both.
uchulainn may have been the name of a real aelic warrior, however
suspiciously he may now resemble the sungod, who is said to have been
his father. ing onchobar may have been the real chief of a tribe of
Irish elts before he became an adumbration of the aelic skygod. It is
the same problem that confronts us in dealing with the heroic legends of
reece and ome. Were Achilles, Agamemnon, dysseus, Paris, neas gods,
demigods, or men Let us call them all alikewhether they be reek or
Troan heroes, ed ranch hampions, or followers of the aelic Finn or
the ritish Arthurdemigods. Even so, they stand definitely apart from
the older gods who were greater than they were.

We are stretching no point in calling them demigods, for they were
goddescended. uchulainn, the greatest hero of the lster cycle,
was doubly so for on his mothers side he was the grandson of the
agda, while Lugh of the Long and is said to have been his father. is
mother, echtir, daughter of aga, the daughter of Angus on of the
Young, was halfsister to ing onchobar, and all the other principal
heroes were of hardly less lofty descent. It is small wonder that they
are described in ancient manuscripts as terrestrial gods and
goddesses.

Terrestrial they may have been in form, but their acts were
superhuman. Indeed, compared with the more modest exploits of the heroes
of the Iliad, they were those of giants. Where reek warriors slew
their tens, these ltonians despatched their hundreds. They came home
after such exploits so heated that their cold baths boiled over. When
they sat down to meat, they devoured whole oxen, and drank their mead
from vats. With one stroke of their favourite swords they beheaded hills
for sport. The gods themselves hardly did more, and it is easy to
understand that in those old days not only might the sons of gods look
upon the daughters of men and find them fair, but immortal women also
need not be too proud to form passing alliances with mortal men.

ome of the older deities seem to have already passed out of memory at
the time of the compilation of the lster cycle. At any rate, they make
no appearance in it. ead uada rests in the grianan of Aileach gma
lies low in sdh Airceltrai while the agda, thrust into the
background by his son Angus, mixes himself very little in the affairs of
Erin. ut the orrg is no less eager in encouraging human or
semidivine heroes to war than she was when she revived the fainting
spirits of the folk of the goddess anu at the attle of oytura. The
gods who appear most often in the cycle of the ed ranch of lster are
the same that have lived on throughout with the most persistent
vitality. Lugh the Longhanded, Angus of the rugh, ider, odb the ed,
and anannn son of Lr, are the principal deities that move in the
background of the stage where the chief parts are now played by mortals.
ut, to make up for the loss of some of the greater divine figures, the
ranks of the gods are being recruited from below. All manner of inferior
divinities claim to be members of the tribe of the goddess anu. The
goblins and sprites and demons of the air who shrieked around battles
are described collectively as Tuatha  anann.

As for the Fomors, they have lost their distinctive names, though they
are still recognized as dwellers beneath the deep, who at times raid
upon the coast, and do battle with the heroes over whom onchobar ruled
at Emain acha.

This seat of his government, the traditionary site of which is still
marked by an extensive prehistoric entrenchment called avan Fort,
near Armagh, was the centre of an lster that stretched southwards as
far as the oyne, and round its ruler gathered such a galaxy of warriors
as Ireland had never seen before, or will again. They called themselves
the hampions of the ed ranch there was not one of them who was not
a hero but they are all dwarfed by one splendid figureuchulainn,
whose name means ulanns ound. r. Alfred utt calls him the Irish
Achilles, while Professor hys would rather see in him a eracles
of the aels. Like Achilles, he was the chosen hero of his people,
invincible in battle, and yet at once to early death and sorrows doomed
beyond the lot of man, while, like eracles, his life was a series of
wonderful exploits and labours. It matters little enough for the lives
of all such mythical heroes must be of necessity somewhat alike.

If Achilles and eracles were, as some think, personifications of the
sun, uchulainn is not less so. ost of his attributes, as the old
stories record them, are obviously solar symbols. e seemed generally
small and insignificant, yet, when he was at his full strength, no one
could look him in the face without blinking, while the heat of his
constitution melted snow for thirty feet all round him. e turned red
and hissed as he dipped his body into its baththe sea. Terrible was his
transformation when sorely oppressed by his enemies, as the sun is by
mist, storm, or eclipse. At such times among the arial clouds over his
head were visible the virulent pouring showers and sparks of ruddy fire
which the seething of his savage wrath caused to mount up above him. is
hair became tangled about his head, as it had been branches of a red
thornbush stuffed into a stronglyfenced gap.... Taller, thicker, more
rigid, longer than mast of a great ship was the perpendicular et of
dusky blood which out of his scalps very central point shot upwards and
then was scattered to the four cardinal points whereby was formed a
magic mist of gloom resembling the smoky pall that drapes a regal
dwelling, what time a king at nightfall of a winters day draws near to
it.

o marvellous a being was, of course, of marvellous birth. is
mother, echtir, was on the point of being married to an lster
chieftain called ualtam, and was sitting at the weddingfeast, when a
mayfly flew into her cup of wine and was unwittingly swallowed by her.
That same afternoon she fell into a deep sleep, and in her dream the
sungod Lugh appeared to her, and told her that it was he whom she had
swallowed, and bore within her. e ordered her and her fifty attendant
maidens to come with him at once, and he put upon them the shapes of
birds, so that they were not seen to go. othing was heard of them
again. ut one day, months later, a flock of beautiful birds appeared
before Emain acha, and drew out its warriors in their chariots to hunt
them.

They followed the birds till nightfall, when they found themselves at
the rugh on the oyne, where the great gods had their homes. As they
looked everywhere for shelter, they suddenly saw a splendid palace. A
tall and handsome man, richly dressed, came out and welcomed them and
led them in. Within the hall were a beautiful and noblefaced woman and
fifty maidens, and on the tables were the richest meats and wines, and
everything fit for the needs of warriors. o they rested there the
night, and, during the night, they heard the cry of a newborn child.
The next morning, the man told them who he was, and that the woman was
onchobars halfsister echtir, and he ordered them to take the child,
and bring it up among the warriors of lster. o they brought him back,
together with his mother and the maidens, and echtir married ualtam,
and all the chiefs, champions, druids, poets, and lawgivers of lster
vied with one another in bringing up the mysterious infant.

At first they called him etanta and this is how he came to change his
name. While still a child, he was the strongest of the boys of Emain
acha, and the champion in their sports. ne day he was playing hurley
singlehanded against all the others, and beating them, when onchobar
the ing rode by with his nobles on the way to a banuet given by
ulann, the chief smith of the ltonians. onchobar called to the boy,
inviting him to go with them, and he replied that, when the game was
finished, he would follow. As soon as the lster champions were in
ulanns hall, the smith asked the kings leave to unloose his terrible
watchdog, which was as strong and fierce as a hundred hounds and
onchobar, forgetting that the boy was to follow them, gave his
permission. Immediately the hound saw etanta coming, it rushed at him,
openmouthed. ut the boy flung his playingball into its mouth, and
then, seizing it by the hindlegs, dashed it against a rock till he had
killed it.

The smith ulann was very angry at the death of his dog for there was
no other hound in the world like him for guarding a house and flocks. o
etanta promised to find and train up another one, not less good, for
ulann, and, until it was trained, to guard the smiths house as though
he were a dog himself. This is why he was called uchulainn, that is,
ulanns ound and athbad the ruid prophesied that the time would
come when the name would be in every mans mouth.

ot long after this, uchulainn overheard athbad giving druidical
instruction, and one of his pupils asking him what that day would be
propitious for. athbad replied that, if any young man first took arms
on that day, his name would be greater than that of any other heros,
but his life would be short. At once, the boy went to ing onchobar,
and demanded arms and a chariot. onchobar asked him who had put such a
thought into his head and he answered that it was athbad the ruid. o
onchobar gave him arms and armour, and sent him out with a charioteer.
That evening, uchulainn brought back the heads of three champions who
had killed many of the warriors of lster. e was then only seven years
old.

The women of lster so loved uchulainn after this that the warriors
grew ealous, and insisted that a wife should be found for him. ut
uchulainn was very hard to please. e would have only one, Emer,
the daughter of Forgall the Wily, the best maiden in Ireland for the six
giftsthe gift of beauty, the gift of voice, the gift of sweet speech,
the gift of needlework, the gift of wisdom, and the gift of chastity. o
he went to woo her, but she laughed at him for a boy. Then uchulainn
swore by the gods of his people that he would make his name known
wherever the deeds of heroes were spoken of, and Emer promised to marry
him if he could take her from her warlike kindred.

When Forgall, her father, came to know of this betrothal, he devised a
plan to put an end to it. e went to visit ing onchobar at Emain
acha. There he pretended to have heard of uchulainn for the first
time, and he saw him do all his feats. e said, loud enough to be
overheard by all, that if so promising a youth dared to go to the Island
of cathach the Amazon, in the east of Alba, and learn all her
warriorcraft, no living man would be able to stand before him. It was
hard to reach cathachs Isle, and still harder to return from it, and
Forgall felt certain that, if uchulainn went, he would get his death
there.

f course, nothing would now satisfy uchulainn but going. is two
friends, Laegaire the attlewinner and onall the ictorious, said that
they would go with him. ut, before they had gone far, they lost heart
and turned back. uchulainn went on alone, crossing the Plain of
IllLuck, where mens feet stuck fast, while sharp grasses sprang up and
cut them, and through the Perilous lens, full of devouring wild beasts,
until he came to the ridge of the liff, which rose on end, till it
stood straight up like a ships mast, as soon as anyone put foot on it.
Three times uchulainn tried to cross it, and thrice he failed. Then
anger came into his heart, and a magic halo shone round his head, and he
did his famous feat of the heros salmon leap, and landed, in one
ump, on the middle of the bridge, and then slid down it as it rose up
on end.

cathach was in the dn, with her two sons. uchulainn went to her,
and put his sword to her breast, and threatened to kill her if she would
not teach him all her own skill in arms. o he became her pupil, and she
taught him all her warcraft. In return, uchulainn helped her against a
rival ueen of the Amazons, called Aoife. e conuered Aoife, and
compelled her to make peace with cathach.

Then he returned to Ireland, and went in a scythed chariot to Forgalls
palace. e leaped over its triple walls, and slew everyone who came near
him. Forgall met his death in trying to escape uchulainns rage. e
found Emer, and placed her in his chariot, and drove away and, every
time that Forgalls warriors came up to them, he turned, and slew a
hundred, and put the rest to flight. e reached Emain acha in safety,
and he and Emer were married there.

And so great, after this, were the fame of uchulainns prowess and
Emers beauty that the men and women of lster yielded them
precedencehim among the warriors and her among the womenin every feast
and banuet at Emain acha.

ut all that uchulainn had done up to this time was as nothing to the
deeds he did in the great war which all the rest of Ireland, headed by
Ailill and edb, ing and ueen of onnaught, made upon lster, to get
the rown ull of ualgne. This ull was one of two, of fairy
descent. They had originally been the swineherds of two of the gods,
odb, ing of the dhe of unster, and chall chne, ing of the dhe
of onnaught. As swineherds they were in perpetual rivalry then, the
better to carry on their uarrel, they changed themselves into two
ravens, and fought for a year next they turned into watermonsters,
which tore one another for a year in the uir and a year in the hannon
then they became human again and fought as champions and ended by
changing into eels. ne of these eels went into the iver ruind, in
ualgne, in lster, where it was swallowed by a cow belonging to
aire of ualgne, and the other into the spring of aran arad, in
onnaught, where it passed into the belly of a cow of ueen edbs. Thus
were born those two famous beasts, the rown ull of lster and the
Whitehorned ull of onnaught.

ow the Whitehorned was of such proud mind that he scorned to belong to
a woman, and he went out of edbs herds into those of her husband
Ailill. o that when Ailill and edb one day, in their idleness, counted
up their possessions, to set them off one against the other, although
they were eual in every other thing, in ewels and clothes and
household vessels, in sheep and horses and swine and cattle, edb had no
one bull that was worthy to be set beside Ailills Whitehorned.
efusing to be less in anything than her husband, the proud ueen sent
heralds, with gifts and compliments, to aire, asking him to lend her
the rown ull for a year. aire would have done so gladly had not one
of edbs messengers been heard boasting in his cups that, if aire had
not lent the rown ull of his own freewill, edb would have taken it.
This was reported to aire, who at once swore that she should never have
it. edbs messenger returned and the ueen of onnaught, furious at
his refusal, vowed that she would take it by force.

he assembled the armies of all the rest of Ireland to go against
lster, and made Fergus son of oy, an lster champion who had
uarrelled with ing onchobar, its leader. They expected to have an
easy victory, for the warriors of lster were at that time lying under a
magic weakness which fell upon them for many days in each year, as the
result of a curse laid upon them, long before, by a goddess who had been
insulted by one of onchobars ancestors. edb called up a prophetess of
her people to foretell victory. ow do you see our hosts asked the
ueen of the seeress. I see crimson on them I see red, she replied.
ut the warriors of lster are lying in their sickness. ay, how do you
see our men I see them all crimson I see them all red, she
repeated. And then she added to the astonished ueen, who had expected a
uite different foretelling For I see a small man doing deeds of arms,
though there are many wounds on his smooth skin the herolight shines
round his head, and there is victory on his forehead he is richly
clothed, and young and beautiful and modest, but he is a dragon in
battle. is appearance and his valour are those of uchulainn of
uirthemne who that ulanns hound from uirthemne may be, I do not
know but I know this, that all our army will be reddened by him. e is
setting out for battle he will hew down your hosts the slaughter he
shall make will be long remembered there will be many women crying over
the bodies mangled by the ound of the Forge whom I see before me
now. For uchulainn was, for some reason unknown to us, the only
man in lster who was not subect to the magic weakness, and therefore
it fell upon him to defend lster singlehanded against the whole of
edbs army.

In spite of the inury done him by ing onchobar, Fergus still kept a
love for his own country. e had not the heart to march upon the
ltonians without first secretly sending a messenger to warn them. o
that, though all the other champions of the ed ranch were helpless,
uchulainn was watching the marches when the army came.

ow begins the story of the aristeia of the aelic hero. It is, after
the manner of epics, the record of a series of single combats, in each
of which uchulainn slays his adversary. an after man comes against
him, and not one goes back. In the intervals between these duels,
uchulainn harasses the army with his sling, slaying a hundred men a
day. e kills edbs pet dog, bird, and suirrel, and creates such
terror that no one dares to stir out of the camp. edb herself has a
narrow escape for one of her servingwomen, who puts on her mistresss
golden headdress, is killed by a stone flung from uchulainns sling.

The great ueen determines to see with her own eyes this marvellous hero
who is holding all her warriors at bay. he sends an envoy, asking him
to come and parley with her. uchulainn agrees, and, at the meeting,
edb is amazed at his boyish look. he finds it hard to believe that it
is this beardless stripling of seventeen who is killing her champions,
until the whole army seems as though it were melting away. he offers
him her own friendship and great honours and possessions in onnaught if
he will forsake onchobar. e refuses but she offers it again and
again. At last uchulainn indignantly declares that the next man who
comes with such a message will do so at his peril. ne bargain, however,
he will make. e is willing to fight one of the men of Ireland every
day, and, while the duel lasts, the main army may march on but, as soon
as uchulainn has killed his man, it must halt until the next day. edb
agrees to this, thinking it better to lose one man a day than a hundred.

edb makes the same offer to every famous warrior, to induce him to go
against uchulainn. The reward for the head of the champion will be the
hand of her daughter, Findabair. In spite of this, not one of the
aspirants to the princess can stand before uchulainn. All perish and
Findabair, when she finds out how she is being promised to a fresh
suitor every day, dies of shame. ut, while uchulainn is engaged in
these combats, edb sends men who scour lster for the brown bull, and
find him, and drive him, with fifty heifers, into her camp.

eanwhile the s dhe, the fairy godclan, are watching the
halfdivine, halfmortal hero, amazed at his achievements. is exploits
kindle love in the fierce heart of the orrg, the great wargoddess.
uchulainn is awakened from sleep by a terrible shout from the north. e
orders his driver, Laeg, to yoke the horses to his chariot, so that he
may find out who raised it. They go in the direction from which the
sound had come, and meet with a woman in a chariot drawn by a red horse.
he has red eyebrows, and a red dress, and a long, red cloak, and she
carries a great, gray spear. e asks her who she is, and she tells him
that she is a kings daughter, and that she has fallen in love with him
through hearing of his exploits. uchulainn says that he has other
things to think of than love. he replies that she has been giving him
her help in his battles, and will still do so and uchulainn answers
that he does not need any womans help. Then, says she, if you will
not have my love and help, you shall have my hatred and enmity. When you
are fighting with a warrior as good as yourself, I will come against you
in various shapes and hinder you, so that he shall have the advantage.
uchulainn draws his sword, but all he sees is a hoodie crow sitting on
a branch. e knows from this that the red woman in the chariot was the
great ueen of the gods.

The next day, a warrior named Loch went to meet uchulainn. At first he
refused to fight one who was beardless so uchulainn smeared his chin
with blackberry uice, until it looked as though he had a beard. While
uchulainn was fighting Loch, the orrg came against him three
timesfirst as a heifer which tried to overthrow him, and next as an eel
which got beneath his feet as he stood in running water, and then as a
wolf which seized hold of his right arm. ut uchulainn broke the
heifers leg, and trampled upon the eel, and put out one of the wolfs
eyes, though, every one of these three times, Loch wounded him. In the
end, uchulainn slew Loch with his invincible spear, the gae
bolg, made of a seamonsters bones. The orrg came back to
uchulainn, disguised as an old woman, to have her wounds healed by him,
for no one could cure them but he who had made them. he became his
friend after this, and helped him.

ut the fighting was so continuous that uchulainn got no sleep, except
ust for a while, from time to time, when he might rest a little, with
his head on his hand and his hand on his spear and his spear on his
knee. o that his father, Lugh the Longhanded, took pity on him and
came to him in the semblance of a tall, handsome man in a green cloak
and a goldembroidered silk shirt, and carrying a black shield and a
fivepronged spear. e put him into a sleep of three days and three
nights, and, while he rested, he laid druidical herbs on to all his
wounds, so that, in the end, he rose up again completely healed and as
strong as at the very beginning of the war. While he was asleep, the
boytroop of Emain acha, uchulainns old companions, came and fought
instead of him, and slew three times their own number, but were all
killed.

It was at this time that edb asked Fergus to go and fight with
uchulainn. Fergus answered that he would never fight against his own
fosterson. edb asked him again and again, and at last he went, but
without his famous sword. Fergus, my guardian, said uchulainn, it is
not safe for you to come out against me without your sword. If I had
the sword, replied Fergus, I would not use it on you. Then Fergus
asked uchulainn, for the sake of all he had done for him in his
boyhood, to pretend to fight with him, and then give way before him and
run away. uchulainn answered that he was very loth to be seen running
from any man. ut Fergus promised uchulainn that, if uchulainn would
run away from Fergus then, Fergus would run away from uchulainn at some
future time, whenever uchulainn wished. uchulainn agreed to this, for
he knew that it would be for the profit of lster. o they fought a
little, and then uchulainn turned and fled in the sight of all edbs
army. Fergus went back and edb could not reproach him any more.

ut she cast about to find some other way of vanuishing uchulainn. The
agreement made had been that only one man a day should be sent against
him. ut now edb sent the wizard alatin with his twentyseven sons and
his grandson all at once, for she said they are really only one, for
they are all from alatins body. They never missed a throw with their
poisoned spears, and every man they hit died, either on the spot or
within the week. When Fergus heard of this, he was in great grief, and
he sent a man called Fiacha, an exile, like himself, from lster, to
watch the fight and report how it went. ow Fiacha did not mean to oin
in it, but when he saw uchulainn assailed by twentynine at a time, and
overpowered, he could not restrain himself. o he drew his sword and
helped uchulainn, and, between them, they killed alatin and his whole
family.

As a last resource, now, edb sent for Ferdiad, who was the great
champion of the Iberian en of omnu, who had thrown in their lot with
edb in the war for the rown ull. Ferdiad had been a companion and
fellowpupil of uchulainn with cathach, and he did not wish to fight
with him. ut edb told him that, if he refused, her satirists should
make such lampoons on him that he would die of shame, and his name would
be a reproach for ever. he also offered him great rewards and honours,
and bound herself in six sureties to keep her promises. At last,
reluctantly, he went.

uchulainn saw him coming, and went out to welcome him but Ferdiad said
that he had not come as a friend, but to fight. ow uchulainn had been
Ferdiads unior and servingboy in cathachs Island, and he begged him
by the memory of those old times to go back but Ferdiad said he could
not. They fought all day, and neither had gained any advantage by
sunset. o they kissed one another, and each went back to his camp.
Ferdiad sent half his food and drink to uchulainn, and uchulainn sent
half his healing herbs and medicines to Ferdiad, and their horses were
put in the same stable, and their charioteers slept by the same fire.
And so it happened on the second day. ut at the end of the third day
they parted gloomily, knowing that on the morrow one of them must fall
and their horses were not put in the same stall that night, neither did
their charioteers sleep at the same fire. n the fourth day, uchulainn
succeeded in killing Ferdiad, by casting the gae bolg at him from
underneath. ut when he saw that he was dying, the battlefury passed
away, and he took his old companion up in his arms, and carried him
across the river on whose banks they had fought, so that he might be
with the men of lster in his death, and not with the men of Ireland.
And he wept over him, and said It was all a game and a sport until
Ferdiad came h, Ferdiad your death will hang over me like a cloud for
ever. Yesterday he was greater than a mountain today he is less than a
shadow.

y this time, uchulainn was so covered with wounds that he could not
bear his clothes to touch his skin, but had to hold them off with
hazelsticks, and fill the spaces in between with grass. There was not a
place on him the size of a needlepoint that had not a wound on it,
except his left hand, which held the shield.

ut ualtam, uchulainns reputed father, had learned what a sore plight
his son was in. o I hear the heaven bursting, or the sea running away,
or the earth breaking open, he cried, or is it my sons groaning that
I hear e came to look for him, and found him covered with wounds and
blood. ut uchulainn would not let his father either weep for him or
try to avenge him. o, rather, he said to him, to Emain acha, and
tell onchobar that I can no longer defend lster against all the four
provinces of Erin without help. Tell him that there is no part of my
body on which there is not a wound, and that, if he wishes to save his
kingdom, he must make no delay.

ualtam mounted uchulainns warhorse, the ray of attle, and
galloped to Emain acha. Three times he shouted en are being killed,
women carried off, and cattle lifted in lster. Twice he met with no
response. The third time, athbad the ruid roused himself from his
lethargy to denounce the man who was disturbing the kings sleep. In his
indignation ualtam turned away so sharply that the gray steed reared,
and struck its riders shield against his neck with such force that he
was decapitated. The startled horse then turned back into onchobars
stronghold, and dashed through it, ualtams severed head continuing to
cry out en are being killed, women carried off, and cattle lifted in
lster. uch a portent was enough to rouse the most drowsy. onchobar,
himself again, swore a great oath. The heavens are over us, the earth
is beneath us, and the sea circles us round, and, unless the heavens
fall, with all their stars, or the earth gives way beneath us, or the
sea bursts over the land, I will restore every cow to her stable, and
every woman to her home.

e sent messengers to rally lster, and they gathered, and marched on
the men of Erin. And then was fought such a battle as had never been
before in Ireland. First one side, then the other, gave way and rallied
again, until uchulainn heard the noise of the fight, and rose up, in
spite of all his wounds, and came to it.

e called out to Fergus, reminding him how he had bound himself with an
oath to run from him when called upon to do so. o Fergus ran before
uchulainn, and when edbs army saw their leader running they broke and
fled like one man.

ut the rown ull of ualgne went with the army into onnaught, and
there he met Ailills bull, the Whitehorned. And he fought the
Whitehorned, and tore him limb from limb, and carried off pieces of him
on his horns, dropping the loins at Athlone and the liver at Trim. Then
he went back to ualgne, and turned mad, killing all who crossed his
path, until his heart burst with bellowing, and he fell dead.

This was the end of the great war called Tin  huailgn, the
riving of the attle of ooley.

Yet, wondrous as it was, it was not the most marvellous of uchulainns
exploits. Like all the solar gods and heroes of eltic myth, he carried
his conuests into the dark region of ades. n this occasion the
mysterious realm is an island called n caith, that is, the hadowy
Town, and though its king is not mentioned by name, it seems likely
that he was ider, and that n caith is another name for the Isle of
Falga, or an. The story, as a poem relates it, is curiously
suggestive of a raid which the powers of light, and especially the
sungods, are represented as having made upon ades in kindred ritish
myth. The same loathsome combatants issue out of the underworld to
repel its assailants. There was a pit in the centre of n caith, out
of which swarmed a vast throng of serpents. o sooner had uchulainn and
the heroes of lster disposed of these than a house full of toads was
loosed upon themsharp, beaked monsters says the poem, which caught
them by the noses, and these were in turn replaced by fierce dragons.
Yet the heroes prevailed and carried off the spoilthree cows of magic
ualities and a marvellous cauldron in which was always found an
inexhaustible supply of meat, with treasure of silver and gold to boot.
They started back for Ireland in a coracle, the three cows being towed
behind, with the treasure in bags around their necks. ut the gods of
ades raised a storm which wrecked their ship, and they had to swim
home. ere uchulainns more than mortal prowess came in useful. We are
told that he floated nine men to shore on each of his hands, and thirty
on his head, while eight more, clinging to his sides, used him as a kind
of lifebelt.

After this, came the tragedy of uchulainns career, the unhappy duel in
which he killed his only son, not knowing who he was. The story is one
common, apparently, to the Aryan nations, for it is found not only in
the aelic, but in the Teutonic and Persian mythic traditions. It will
be remembered that uchulainn defeated a rival of cathach the Amazon,
named Aoife, and compelled her to render submission. The hero had also a
son by Aoife, and he asked that the boy should be called onlaoch,
and that, when he was of age to travel, he should be sent to Ireland to
find his father. Aoife promised this, but, a little later, news came to
her that uchulainn had married Emer. ad with ealousy, she determined
to make the son avenge her slight upon the father. he taught him the
craft of arms until there was no more that he could learn, and sent him
to Ireland. efore he started, she laid three geasa upon him. The
first was that he was not to turn back, the second that he was never to
refuse a challenge, and the third that he was never to tell his name.

e arrived at undealgan, uchulainns home, and the warrior onall
came down to meet him, and asked him his name and lineage. e refused to
tell them, and this led to a duel, in which onall was disarmed and
humiliated. uchulainn next approached him, asked the same uestion, and
received the same answer. Yet if I was not under a command, said
onlaoch, who did not know he was speaking to his father, there is no
man in the world to whom I would sooner tell it than to yourself, for I
love your face. Even this compliment could not stave off the fight, for
uchulainn felt it his duty to punish the insolence of this stripling
who refused to declare who he was. The fight was a fierce one, and the
invincible uchulainn found himself so pressed that the herolight
shone round him and transfigured his face. When onlaoch saw this, he
knew who his antagonist must be, and purposely flung his spear slantways
that it might not hit his father. ut before uchulainn understood, he
had thrown the terrible gae bolg. onlaoch, dying, declared his name
and so passionate was uchulainns grief that the men of lster were
afraid that in his madness he might wreak his wrath upon them. They,
therefore, called upon athbad the ruid to put him under a glamour.
athbad turned the waves of the sea into the appearance of armed men,
and uchulainn smote them with his sword until he fell prone from
weariness.

It would take too long to relate all the other adventures and exploits
of uchulainn. Enough has been done if any reader of this chapter should
be persuaded by it to study the wonderful saga of ancient Ireland for
himself. We must pass on uickly to its tragical closethe heros death.

edb, ueen of onnaught, had never forgiven him for keeping back her
army from raiding lster, and for slaying so many of her friends and
allies. o she went secretly to all those whose relations uchulainn had
killed and they were many, and stirred them up to revenge.

esides this, she had sent the three daughters of alatin the Wizard,
born after their fathers death at the hands of uchulainn, to Alba and
to abylon to learn witchcraft. When they came back they were mistresses
of every kind of sorcery, and could make the illusion of battle with an
incantation.

And, lest she might fail even then, she waited with patience until the
ltonians were again in their magic weakness, and there was no one to
help uchulainn but himself.

Lugaid, son of the uroi, ing of unster whom uchulainn had
killed for the sake of lathnat, iders daughter, gathered the unster
men Erc, whose father had also fallen at uchulainns hands, called the
men of eath the ing of Leinster brought out his army and, with
Ailill and edb and all onnaught, they marched into lster again, and
began to ravage it.

onchobar called his warriors and druids into council, to see if they
could find some means of putting off war until they were ready to meet
it. e did not wish uchulainn to go out singlehanded a second time
against all the rest of Ireland, for he knew that, if the champion
perished, the prosperity of lster would fall with him for ever. o,
when uchulainn came to Emain acha, the king set all the ladies,
singers, and poets of the court to keep his thoughts from war until the
men of lster had recovered from their weakness.

ut while they sat feasting and talking in the sunny house, the three
daughters of alatin came fluttering down on to the lawn before it, and
began gathering grass and thistles and puffballs and withered leaves,
and turning them into the semblance of armies. And, by the same magic,
they caused shouts and shrieks and trumpetblasts and the clattering of
arms to be heard all round the house, as though a battle were being
fought.

uchulainn leaped up, red with shame to think that fighting should be
going on without his help, and seized his sword. ut athbads son
caught him by the arms. All the druids explained to him that what he saw
was only an enchantment raised by the children of alatin to draw him
out to his death. ut it was as much as all of them could do to keep him
uiet while he saw the phantom armies and heard the magic sounds.

o they decided that it would be well to remove uchulainn from Emain
acha to leannaodhar, the eaf alley, until all the
enchantments of the daughters of alatin were spent. It was the uality
of this valley that, if all the men of Ireland were to shout round it at
once, no one within it would hear a sound.

ut the daughters of alatin went there too, and again they took
thistles and puffballs and withered leaves, and put on them the
appearance of armed men so that there seemed to be no place outside the
whole valley that was not filled with shouting battalions. And they made
the illusion of fires all around and the sound of women shrieking.
Everyone who heard that outcry was frightened at it, not only the men
and women, but even the dogs.

Though the women and the druids shouted back with all the strength of
their voices, to drown it, they could not keep uchulainn from hearing.
Alas he cried, I hear the men of Ireland shouting as they ravage the
province. y triumph is at an end my fame is gone lster lies low for
ever. Let it pass, said athbad it is only the idle magic noises
made by the children of alatin, who want to draw you out, to put an end
to you. tay here with us, and take no heed of them.

uchulainn obeyed and the daughters of alatin went on for a long time
filling the air with noises of battle. ut they grew tired of it at
last for they saw that the druids and women had outwitted them.

They did not succeed until one of them took the form of a leman of
uchulainns, and came to him, crying out that undealgan was burnt, and
uirthemne ruined, and the whole province of lster ravaged. Then, at
last, he was deceived, and took his arms and armour, and, in spite of
all that was said to him, he ordered Laeg to yoke his chariot.

igns and portents now began to gather as thickly round the doomed hero
as they did round the wooers in the hall of dysseus. is famous
warhorse, the ray of acha, refused to be bridled, and shed large
tears of blood. is mother, echtir, brought him a goblet full of wine,
and thrice the wine turned into blood as he put it to his lips. At the
first ford he crossed, he saw a maiden of the sdhe washing clothes
and armour, and she told him that it was the clothes and arms of
uchulainn, who was soon to be dead. e met three ancient hags cooking a
hound on spits of rowan, and they invited him to partake of it. e
refused, for it was taboo to him to eat the flesh of his namesake but
they shamed him into doing so by telling him that he ate at rich mens
tables and refused the hospitality of the poor. The forbidden meat
paralysed half his body. Then he saw his enemies coming up against him
in their chariots.

uchulainn had three spears, of which it was prophesied that each should
kill a king. Three druids were charged in turn to ask for these spears
for it was not thought lucky to refuse anything to a druid. The first
one came up to where uchulainn was making the plain red with slaughter.
ive me one of those spears, he said, or I will lampoon you. Take
it, replied uchulainn, I have never yet been lampooned for refusing
anyone a gift. And he threw the spear at the druid, and killed him. ut
Lugaid, son of uroi, got the spear, and killed Laeg with it. Laeg was
the king of all chariotdrivers.

ive me one of your spears, uchulainn, said the second druid. I need
it myself, he replied. I will lampoon the province of lster because
of you, if you refuse. I am not obliged to give more than one gift in
a day, said uchulainn, but lster shall never be lampooned because of
me. e threw the spear at the druid, and it went through his head. ut
Erc, ing of Leinster, got it, and mortally wounded the ray of acha,
the king of all horses.

ive me your spear, said the third druid. I have paid all that is due
from myself and lster, replied uchulainn. I will satirize your
kindred if you do not, said the druid. I shall never go home, but I
will be the cause of no lampoons there, answered uchulainn, and he
threw the spear at the asker, and killed him. ut Lugaid threw it back,
and it went through uchulainns body, and wounded him to the death.

Then, in his agony, he greatly desired to drink. e asked his enemies to
let him go to a lake that lay close by, and uench his thirst, and then
come back again. If I cannot come back to you, come to fetch me, he
said and they let him go.

uchulainn drank, and bathed, and came out of the water. ut he found
that he could not walk so he called to his enemies to come to him.
There was a pillarstone near and he bound himself to it with his belt,
so that he might die standing up, and not lying down. is dying horse,
the ray of acha, came back to fight for him, and killed fifty men with
his teeth and thirty with each of his hoofs. ut the herolight had
died out of uchulainns face, leaving it as pale as a onenights
snow, and a crow came and perched upon his shoulder.

Truly it was not upon that pillar that birds used to sit, said Erc.

ow that they were certain that uchulainn was dead, they all gathered
round him, and Lugaid cut off his head to take it to edb. ut vengeance
came uickly, for onall the ictorious was in pursuit, and he made a
terrible slaughter of uchulainns enemies.

Thus perished the great hero of the aels in the twentyseventh year of
his age. And with him fell the prosperity of Emain acha and of the ed
ranch of lster.



Footnote 

    There came
     Tigernmas, the prince of Tara yonder,
     n alloween with many hosts,
     A cause of grief to them was the deed.

    ead were the men
     f anbas host, without happy strength,
     Around Tigernmas, the destructive man in the orth,
     From the worship of romm ruaichtwas no luck for them.

    For I have learnt,
     Except onefourth of the keen aels
     ot a man alivelasting the snare
     Escaped without death in his mouth.

     r. uno eyers translation of the innsenchus of ag lecht.

Footnote 

  utt oyage of ran, p. .

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe ods in Exile.

Footnote 

  Pronounced aive.

Footnote 

  The story of the Tragical eath of ing onchobar, translated by
  Eugene urry from the ook of Leinster, will be found in the
  appendix to his . aterials of Irish istory, and more
  accessible in iss ulls uchullin aga.

Footnote 

  The name is best pronounced hoolin or uchullin ch as in
  erman.

Footnote 

  The descent of the principal ed ranch eroes from the Tuatha 
  anann is given in a table in iss ulls Introduction to her
  uchullin aga.

Footnote 

  onchobar is called a terrestrial god of the ltonians in the ook of
  the un ow, and echtir is termed a goddess in the ook of Leinster.

Footnote 

  e is last heard of as chief cook to onair the reat, a mythical
  king of Ireland.

Footnote 

  In the ook of Leinster.

Footnote 

  For a description of avan Fort see a paper by . de ubainville in
  the evue eltiue, ol. I.

Footnote 

  uchulainn, the Irish Achilles. y Alfred utt. Popular tudies in
  ythology, omance, and Folklore, o. .

Footnote 

  ee a series of interesting parallels between uchulainn and eracles
  in tudies in the Arthurian Legend, chap. I and .

Footnote 

  The Tin  huailgn. Translated by tandish ayes rady.

Footnote 

  The Irish romances relating to uchulainn and his cycle, nearly a
  hundred in number, need hardly be referred to severally in this
  chapter. f many of the tales, too, there exist several
  slightlyvarying versions. any of them have been translated by
  different scholars. The reader desiring a more complete survey of the
  uchulainn legend is referred to iss ulls uchullin aga or to
  Lady regorys uchulain of uirthemne.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Avair.

Footnote 

  sually identified, however, with the Isle of kye.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Eefa.

Footnote 

  A literal translation by iss Winifred Faraday of the Tin o
  huailgn from the ook of the un ow and the Yellow ook of Lecan
  has been published by r. uttrimm Library, o. .

Footnote 

  Pronounced ooley.

Footnote 

  This prophecy here much abridged is, in the original, in verse.

Footnote 

  Finnavr.

Footnote 

  ellowsdart, apparently a kind of harpoon. It had thirty barbs.

Footnote 

  It is contained in the ook of the un ow story called the Phantom
  hariot.

Footnote 

  ee chap. The ictories of Light over arkness.

Footnote 

  Pronounced onla.

Footnote 

  A kind of mystic prohibition or taboo singular, geis.

Footnote 

  ow called undalk.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Lewy.

Footnote 

  Pronounced len na ower.






                              APTE III

                        E AELI LETIE


The heroic age of Ireland was not, however, the mere orgy of battle
which one might assume from the previous chapter. It had room for its
elen and its Andromache as well as for its Achilles and its ector. Its
champions could find time to make love as well as war. ore than this,
the legends of their courtships often have a romantic beauty found in no
other early literature. The women have free scope of choice, and claim
the respect of their wooers. Indeed, it has been pointed out that the
mythical stories of the elts must have created the chivalrous romances
of medival Europe. In them, and in no other previous literature, do we
find such knightly treatment of an enemy as we see in the story of
uchulainn and Ferdiad, or such poetic delicacy towards a woman as is
displayed in the wooing of Emer. The talk between man and maid when
uchulainn comes in his chariot to pay his suit to Emer at Forgalls
dn might, save for its strangeness, almost have come out of some
uite modern romance.

Emer lifted up her lovely face and recognised uchulainn, and she said,
ay od make smooth the path before you

And you, he said, may you be safe from every harm.

he asks him whence he has come, and he tells her. Then he uestions her
about herself.

I am a Tara of women, she replies, the whitest of maidens, one who is
gazed at but who gazes not back, a rush too far to be reached, an
untrodden way.... I was brought up in ancient virtues, in lawful
behaviour, in the keeping of chastity, in rank eual to a ueen, in
stateliness of form, so that to me is attributed every noble grace among
the hosts of Erins women. In more boastful strain uchulainn tells of
his own birth and deeds. ot like the son of a peasant had he been
reared at onchobars court, but among heroes and champions, esters and
druids. When he is weakest his strength is that of twenty alone he will
fight against forty a hundred men would feel safe under his protection.
ne can imagine Emers smile as she listens to these braggings. Truly,
she says, they are goodly feats for a tender boy, but they are not yet
those of chariotchiefs. ery modern, too, is the way in which she
coyly reminds her wooer that she has an elder sister as yet unwed. ut,
when at last he drives her to the point, she answers him with gentle,
but proud decision. ot by words, but by deeds is she to be won. The man
she will marry must have his name mentioned wherever the exploits of
heroes are spoken of.

Even as thou hast commanded, so shall all by me be done, said
uchulainn.

And by me your offer is accepted, it is taken, it is granted, replied
Emer.

It seems a pity that, after so fine a wooing, uchulainn could not have
kept faithful to the bride he won. Yet such is not the way of heroes
whom goddesses as well as mortal women conspire to tempt from their
loyalty. Fand, the wife of anannn son of Lr, deserted by the seagod,
sent her sister Liban to uchulainn as an ambassador of love. At first
he refused to visit her, but ordered Laeg, his charioteer, to go with
Liban to the appy Plain to spy out the land. Laeg returned
enraptured. If all Ireland were mine, he assured his master, with
supreme rule over its fair inhabitants, I would give it up without
regret to go and live in the place that I have seen.

o uchulainn himself went and stayed a month in the eltic Paradise
with Fand, the fairest woman of the dhe. eturning to the land of
mortals, he made a tryst with the goddess to meet him again in his own
country by the yewtree at the head of ailes strand.

ut Emer came to hear of it, and went to the meetingplace herself, with
fifty of her maidens, each armed with a knife to kill her rival. There
she found uchulainn, Laeg, and Fand.

What has led you, uchulainn, said Emer, to shame me before the women
of Erin and all honourable people I came under your shelter, trusting
in your faithfulness, and now you seek a cause of uarrel with me.

ut uchulainn, herolike, could not understand why his wife should not
be content to take her turn with this other womansurely no unworthy
rival, for she was beautiful, and came of the lofty race of gods. We see
Emer yield at last, with ueenly pathos.

I will not refuse this woman to you, if you long for her, she said,
for I know that everything that is new seems fair, and everything that
is common seems bitter, and everything we have not seems desirable to
us, and everything we have we think little of. And yet, uchulainn, I
was once pleasing to you, and I would wish to be so again.

er grief touched him. y my word, he said, you are pleasing to me,
and will be as long as I live.

Then let me be given up, said Fand. It is better that I should be,
replied Emer. o, said Fand it is I who must be given up in the end.

It is I who will go, though I go with great sorrow. I would rather stay
with uchulainn than live in the sunny home of the gods.

 Emer, he is yours, and you are worthy of him What my hand cannot
have, my heart may yet wish well to.

A sorrowful thing it is to love without return. etter to renounce than
not to receive a love eual to ones own.

It was not well of you,  fairhaired Emer, to come to kill Fand in her
misery.

It was while the goddess and the human woman were contending with one
another in selfsacrifice that anannn, on of the ea, heard of Fands
trouble, and was sorry that he had forsaken her. o he came, invisible
to all but her alone. e asked her pardon, and she herself could not
forget that she had once been happy with the horseman of the crested
waves, and still might be happy with him again. The god asked her to
make her choice between them, and, when she went to him, he shook his
mantle between her and uchulainn. It was one of the magic properties of
anannns mantle that those between whom it was shaken could never meet
again. Then Fand returned with her divine husband to the country of the
immortals and the druids of Emain acha gave uchulainn and Emer each a
drink of oblivion, so that uchulainn forgot his love and Emer her
ealousy.

The scene of this story takes its name from another, and hardly less
beautiful lovetale. The yewtree at the head of ailes strand had
grown out of the grave of aile of the oneyed peech, and it bore the
appearance of ailes love, Ailinn. This aelic omeo and uliet were of
royal birth aile was heir to lster, and Ailinn was daughter of the
ing of Leinsters son. ot by any feud of ontague and apulet were
they parted, however, but by the craft of a ghostly enemy. They had
appointed to meet one another at undealgan, and aile, who arrived
there first, was greeted by a stranger. What news do you bring asked
aile. one, replied the stranger, except that Ailinn of Leinster was
setting out to meet her lover, but the men of Leinster kept her back,
and her heart broke then and there from grief. When aile heard this,
his own heart broke, and he fell dead on the strand, while the messenger
went on the wings of the wind to the home of Ailinn, who had not yet
started. Whence come you she asked him. From lster, by the shore of
undealgan, where I saw men raising a stone over one who had ust died,
and on the stone I read the name of aile. e had come to meet some
woman he was in love with, but it was destined that they should never
see one another again in life. At this news Ailinn, too, fell dead, and
was buried and we are told that an appletree grew out of her grave,
the apples of which bore the likeness of the face of aile, while a
yewtree sprung from ailes grave, and took the appearance of Ailinn.
This legend, which is probably a part of the common heritage of the
Aryans, is found in folklore over an area which stretches from Ireland
to India. The aelic version has, however, an ending unknown to the
others. The two trees, it relates, were cut down, and made into wands
upon which the poets of lster and of Leinster cut the songs of the
lovetragedies of their two provinces, in ogam. ut even these mute
memorials of aile and Ailinn were destined not to be divided. After two
hundred years, Art the Lonely, ighing of Ireland, ordered them to
be brought to the hall of Tara, and, as soon as the wands found
themselves under the same roof, they all sprang together, and no force
or skill could part them again. o the king commanded them to be kept,
like any other ewel, in the treasury of Tara.

either of these stories, however, has as yet attained the fame of one
now to be retold. To many, no doubt, aelic romance is summed up in
the one word eirdre. It is the legend of this aelic elen that the
poets of the modern eltic school most love to elaborate, while old men
still tell it round the peatfires of Ireland and the ighlands. cholar
and peasant alike combine to preserve a tradition no one knows how many
hundred years old, for it was written down in the twelfthcentury ook
of Leinster as one of the prime stories which every bard was bound to
be able to recite. It takes rank with the Fate of the ons of Tuirenn,
and with the Fate of the hildren of Lr, as one of the Three
orrowful tories of Erin.

o favourite a tale has naturally been much altered and added to in its
passage down the generations. ut its essential story is as follows

ing onchobar of lster was holding festival in the house of one of his
bards, called Fedlimid, when Fedlimids wife gave birth to a daughter,
concerning whom athbad the ruid uttered a prophecy. e foretold that
the newborn child would grow up to be the most lovely woman the world
had ever seen, but that her beauty would bring death to many heroes, and
much peril and sorrow to lster. n hearing this, the ed ranch
warriors demanded that she should be killed, but onchobar refused, and
gave the infant to a trusted servingwoman, to be hidden in a secret
place in the solitude of the mountains, until she was of an age to be
his own wife.

o eirdre as athbad named her was taken away to a hut so remote from
the paths of men that none knew of it save onchobar. ere she was
brought up by a nurse, a fosterer, and a teacher, and saw no other
living creatures save the beasts and birds of the hills. evertheless,
womanlike, she aspired to be loved.

ne day, her fosterer was killing a calf for their food, and its blood
ran out upon the snowy ground, which brought a black raven swooping to
the spot. If there were a man, said eirdre, who had hair of the
blackness of that raven, skin of the whiteness of the snow, and cheeks
as red as the calfs blood, that is the man whom I would wish to marry
me.

Indeed there is such a man, replied her teacher thoughtlessly.
aoise, one of the sons of snach, heroes of the same race as
onchobar the ing.

The curious eirdre prevailed upon her teacher to bring aoise to speak
with her. When they met she made good use of her time, for she offered
aoise her love, and begged him to take her away from ing onchobar.

aoise, bewitched by her beauty, consented. Accompanied by his two
brothers, Ardan and Ainle, and their followers, he fled with eirdre to
Alba, where they made alliance with one of its kings, and wandered over
the land, living by following the deer, and by helping the king in his
battles.

The revengeful onchobar bided his time. ne day, as the heroes of the
ed ranch feasted together at Emain acha, he asked them if they had
ever heard of a nobler company than their own. They replied that the
world could not hold such another. Yet, said the king, we lack our
full tale. The three sons of snach could defend the province of lster
against any other province of Ireland by themselves, and it is a pity
that they should still be exiles, for the sake of any woman in the
world. ladly would I welcome them back

We ourselves, replied the ltonians, would have counselled this long
ago had we dared,  ing

Then I will send one of my three best champions to fetch them, said
onchobar. Either onall the ictorious, or uchulainn, the son of
ualtam, or Fergus, the son of oy and I will find out which of those
three loves me best.

First he called onall to him secretly.

What would you do,  onall, he asked, if you were sent to fetch the
sons of snach, and they were killed here, in spite of your
safeconduct

There is not a man in lster, answered onall, who had hand in it
that would escape his own death from me.

I see that I am not dearest of all men to you, replied onchobar, and,
dismissing onall, he called uchulainn, and put the same uestion to
him.

y my sworn word, replied uchulainn, if such a thing happened with
your consent, no bribe or bloodfine would I accept in lieu of your own
head,  onchobar.

Truly, said the king, it is not you I will send.

The king then asked Fergus, and he replied that, if the sons of snach
were slain while under his protection, he would revenge the deed upon
anyone who was party to it, save only the king himself.

Then it is you who shall go, said onchobar. et forth tomorrow, and
rest not by the way, and when you put foot again in Ireland at the n
of orrach, whatever may happen to you yourself, send the sons of snach
forward without delay.

The next morning, Fergus, with his two sons, Illann the Fair and uinne
the uthless ed, set out for Alba in their galley, and reached Loch
Etive, by whose shores the sons of snach were then living. aoise,
Ainle, and Ardan were sitting at chess when they heard Ferguss shout.

That is the cry of a man of Erin, said aoise.

ay, replied eirdre, who had forebodings of trouble. o not heed it
it is only the shout of a man of Alba. ut the sons of snach knew
better, and sent Ardan down to the seashore, where he found Fergus and
his sons, and gave them greeting, and heard their message, and brought
them back with him.

That night Fergus persuaded the sons of snach to return with him to
Emain acha. eirdre, with her second sight, implored them to remain
in Alba. ut the exiles were weary for the sight of their own country,
and did not share their companions fears. As they put out to sea,
eirdre uttered her beautiful Farewell to Alba, that land she was
never to behold again.

           A lovable land is yon eastern land,
            Alba, with its marvels.
            I would not have come hither out of it,
            ad I not come with aoise.

           Lovable are nfidga and nfinn,
            Lovable the fortress over them
            ear to the heart Inis raigende,
            And very dear is n uibni.

           aill uan
            nto which Ainle would wend, alas
            hort the time seemed to me,
            With aoise in the region of Alba.

           lenn Lid
            ften I slept there under the cliff
            Fish and venison and the fat of the badger
            Was my portion in lenn Lid.

           lenn asin
            Its garlic was tall, its branches white
            We slept a rocking sleep,
            ver the grassy estuary of asin.

           lenn Etive
            Where my first house I raised
            eauteous its woodupon rising
            A cattlefold for the sun was lenn Etive.

                                                   

           lenn ad
            y love to every man who hath it as an heritage
            weet the cuckoos note on bending bough,
            n the peak over lenn ad.

           eloved is raigen,
            ear the white sand beneath its waves
            I would not have come from it, from the East,
            ad I not come with my beloved.

They crossed the sea, and arrived at the n of orrach, who bade them
welcome to Ireland. ow ing onchobar had sent orrach a secret
command, that he should offer a feast to Fergus on his landing. trange
taboos called geasa are laid upon the various heroes of ancient
Ireland in the stories there are certain things that each one of them
may not do without forfeiting life or honour and it was a geis upon
Fergus to refuse a feast.

Fergus, we are told, reddened with anger from crown to sole at the
invitation. Yet he could not avoid the feast. e asked aoise what he
should do, and eirdre broke in with o what is asked of you if you
prefer to forsake the sons of snach for a feast. Yet forsaking them is
a good price to pay for it.

Fergus, however, perceived a possible compromise. Though he himself
could not refuse to stop to partake of orrachs hospitality, he could
send eirdre and the sons of snach on to Emain acha at once, under the
safeguard of his two sons, Illann the Fair and uinne the uthless ed.
o this was done, albeit to the annoyance of the sons of snach and the
terror of eirdre. isions came to the sorrowful woman she saw the
three sons of snach and Illann, the son of Fergus, without their heads
she saw a cloud of blood always hanging over them. he begged them to
wait in some safe place until Fergus had finished the feast. ut aoise,
Ainle, and Ardan laughed at her fears. They arrived at Emain acha, and
onchobar ordered the ed ranch palace to be placed at their
disposal.

In the evening onchobar called Levarcham, eirdres old teacher, to
him. o, he said, to the ed ranch, and see eirdre, and bring me
back news of her appearance, whether she still keeps her former beauty,
or whether it has left her.

o Levarcham came to the ed ranch, and kissed eirdre and the three
sons of snach, and warned them that onchobar was preparing treachery.
Then she went back to the king, and reported to him that eirdres hard
life upon the mountains of Alba had ruined her form and face, so that
she was no longer worthy of his regard.

At this, onchobars ealousy was partly allayed, and he began to doubt
whether it would be wise to attack the sons of snach. ut later on,
when he had drunk well of wine, he sent a second messenger to see if
what Levarcham had reported about eirdre was truth.

The messenger, this time a man, went and looked in through a window.
eirdre saw him and pointed him out to aoise, who flung a chessman at
the peering face, and put out one of its eyes. ut the man went back to
onchobar, and told him that, though one of his eyes had been struck
out, he would gladly have stayed looking with the other, so great was
eirdres loveliness.

Then onchobar, in his wrath, ordered the men of lster to set fire to
the ed ranch ouse and slay all within it except eirdre. They flung
firebrands upon it, but uinne the uthless ed came out and uenched
them, and drove the assailants back with slaughter. ut onchobar called
to him to parley, and offered him a hundred of land and his friendship
to desert the sons of snach. uinne was tempted, and fell but the land
given him turned barren that very night in indignation at being owned by
such a traitor.

The other of Ferguss sons was of different make. e charged out, torch
in hand, and cut down the ltonians, so that they hesitated to come near
the house again. onchobar dared not offer him a bribe. ut he armed his
own son, Fiacha, with his own magic weapons, including his shield, the
oaner, which roared when its owner was in danger, and sent him to
fight Illann.

The duel was a fierce one, and Illann got the better of Fiacha, so that
the son of onchobar had to crouch down beneath his shield, which roared
for help. onall the ictorious heard the roar from far off, and thought
that his king must be in peril. e came to the place, and, without
asking uestions, thrust his spear luegreen through Illann. The
dying son of Fergus explained the situation to onall, who, by way of
making some amends, at once killed Fiacha as well.

After this, the sons of snach held their fort till dawn against all
onchobars host. ut, with day, they saw that they must either escape
or resign themselves to perish. Putting eirdre in their centre,
protected by their shields, they opened the door suddenly and fled out.

They would have broken through and escaped, had not onchobar asked
athbad the ruid to put a spell upon them, promising to spare their
lives. o athbad raised the illusion of a stormy sea before and all
around the sons of snach. aoise lifted eirdre upon his shoulder, but
the magic waves rose higher, until they were all obliged to fling away
their weapons and swim.

Then was seen the strange sight of men swimming upon dry land. And,
before the glamour passed away, the sons of snach were seized from
behind, and brought to onchobar.

In spite of his promise to the druid, the king condemned them to death.
one of the men of lster would, however, deal the blow. In the end, a
foreigner from orway, whose father aoise had slain, offered to behead
them. Each of the brothers begged to die first, that he might not
witness the deaths of the others. ut aoise ended this noble rivalry by
lending their executioner the sword called The etaliator, which had
been given him by anannn son of Lr. They knelt down side by side, and
one blow of the sword of the god shore off all their heads.

As for eirdre, there are varying stories of her death, but most of them
agree that she did not survive the sons of snach many hours. ut,
before she died, she made an elegy over them. That it is of a singular
pathos and beauty the few verses which there is space to give will
show.

          Long the day without snachs children
           It was not mournful to be in their company
           ons of a king by whom soourners were entertained,
           Three lions from the ill of the ave.

                                                  

          Three darlings of the women of ritain,
           Three hawks of lieve ullion,
           ons of a king whom valour served,
           To whom soldiers used to give homage

                                                  

          That I should remain after aoise
           Let no one in the world suppose
           After Ardan and Ainle
           y time would not be long.

          lsters overking, my first husband,
           I forsook for aoises love.
           hort my life after them
           I will perform their funeral game.

          After them I shall not be alive
           Three that would go into every conflict,
           Three who liked to endure hardships,
           Three heroes who refused not combats.

                                                  

           man, that diggest the tomb
           And puttest my darling from me,
           ake not the grave too narrow
           I shall be beside the noble ones.

It was a poor triumph for onchobar. eirdre in all her beauty had
escaped him by death. is own chief followers never forgave it. Fergus,
when he returned from orrachs feast, and found out what had been done,
gathered his own people, slew onchobars son and many of his warriors,
and fled to lsters bitterest enemies, Ailill and edb of onnaught.
And athbad the ruid cursed both king and kingdom, praying that none of
onchobars race might ever reign in Emain acha again.

o it came to pass. The capital of lster was only kept from ruin by
uchulainns prowess. When he perished, it also fell, and soon became
what it is nowa grassy hill.



Footnote 

  The romance of the Wooing of Emer, a fragment of which is contained
  in the ook of the un ow, has been translated by r. uno eyer, and
  published by him in the Archological eview, ol. I, . iss
  ull has included this translation in her uchullin aga. Another
  version of it from a odleian ., translated by the same scholar,
  will be found in the evue eltiue, ol. I.

Footnote 

  This story, known as the icked of uchulainn, translated into
  French by . dArbois de ubainville, will be found in his Lpope
  eltiue en Irlande, the fifth volume of our de Littrature
  eltiue. Another translation, into English, by Eugene urry is in
  Atlantis, ols. I and II.

Footnote 

  For the full story of aile and Ailinn see r. uno eyers
  translation in ol. III of the evue eltiue.

Footnote 

  There are not only numerous translations of this romance, but also
  many aelic versions. The oldest of the latter is in the ook of
  Leinster, while the fullest are in two . in the Advocates Library
  at Edinburgh. The version followed here is from one of these, the
  socalled lenn asin ., translated by r. Whitley tokes, and
  contained in iss ulls uchullin aga.

Footnote 

  Pronounced aisi.

Footnote 

  Pronounced sna.

Footnote 

  It will be found in full in iss ulls uchullin aga. The version
  there given was first translated into French by . Ponsinet from the
  ook of Leinster.






                              APTE I

                       FI A TE FEIA


The epoch of Emain acha is followed in the annals of ancient Ireland by
a succession of monarchs who, though doubtless as mythical as ing
onchobar and his court, seem to grow gradually more human. Their line
lasts for about two centuries, culminating in a dynasty with which
legend has occupied itself more than with its immediate predecessors.
This is the one which began, according to the annalists, in A.. ,
with the famous onn the undredFighter, and, passing down to the
reign of his even more famous grandson, ormac the agnificent, is
connected with the third aelic cyclethat which relates the exploits of
Finn and the Fenians. All these kings had their dealings with the
national gods. A story contained in a fifteenthcentury Irish
manuscript, and called The hampions Prophecy, tells how Lugh
appeared to onn, enveloped him in a magic mist, led him away to an
enchanted palace, and there prophesied to him the number of his
descendants, the length of their reigns, and the manner of their deaths.
Another tradition relates how onns son, onnla, was wooed by a goddess
and borne away, like the ritish Arthur, in a boat of glass to the
Earthly Paradise beyond the sea. Yet another relates onns own
marriage with ecuma of the Fair kin, wife of that same Labraid of the
uick and on word who, in another legend, married Liban, the sister of
Fand, uchulainns fairy love. ecuma had been discovered in an intrigue
with aiar, a son of anannn, and, banished from the Land of Promise,
crossed the sea that sunders mortals and immortals to offer her hand to
onn. The Irish king wedded her, but evil came of the marriage. he grew
ealous of onns other son, Art, and insisted upon his banishment but
they agreed to play chess to decide which should go, and Art won. Art,
called the Lonely because he had lost his brother onnla, was king
after onn, but he is chiefly known to legend as the father of ormac.

any Irish stories occupy themselves with the fame of ormac, who is
pictured as a great legislatora aelic olomon. ertain traditions
credit him with having been the first to believe in a purer doctrine
than the eltic polytheism, and even with having attempted to put down
druidism, in revenge for which a druid called aelcen sent an evil
spirit who placed a salmonbone crossways in the kings throat, as he
sat at meat, and so compassed his death. Another class of stories,
however, make him an especial favourite with those same heathen deities.
anannn son of Lr, was so anxious for his friendship that he decoyed
him into fairyland, and gave him a magic branch. It was of silver, and
bore golden apples, and, when it was shaken, it made such sweet music
that the wounded, the sick, and the sorrowful forgot their pains, and
were lulled into deep sleep. ormac kept this treasure all his life
but, at his death, it returned into the hands of the gods.

ing ormac was a contemporary of Finn mac oul, whom he appointed
head of the Fianna Eirinn, more generally known as the Fenians.
Around Finn and his men have gathered a cycle of legends which were
eually popular with the aels of both cotland and Ireland. We read of
their exploits in stories and poems preserved in the earliest Irish
manuscripts, while among the peasantry both of Ireland and of the West
ighlands their names and the stories connected with them are still
current lore. pon some of these floating traditions, as preserved in
folk ballads, acPherson founded his factitious ssian, and the
collection of them from the lips of living men still affords plenty of
employment to aelic students.

ow far Finn and his followers may have been historical personages it is
impossible to say. The Irish people themselves have always held that the
Fenians were a kind of native militia, and that Finn was their general.
The early historical writers of Ireland supported this view. The
chronicler Tighernach, who died in , believed in him, and the
Annals of the Four asters, compiled between the years  and 
from older chronicles, while they ignore ing onchobar and his ed
ranch hampions as unworthy of the serious consideration of historians,
treat Finn as a real person whose death took place in  A.. Even so
great a modern scholar as Eugene urry declared in the clearest
language that Finn, so far from being a merely imaginary or mythical
character, was an undoubtedly historical personage and that he
existed about the time at which his appearance is recorded in the Annals
is as certain as that ulius aesar lived and ruled at the time stated
on the authority of the oman historians.

The opinion of more recent eltic scholars, however, is opposed to this
view. Finns pedigree, preserved in the ook of Leinster, may seem at
first to give some support to the theory of his real existence, but, on
more careful examination of it, his own name and that of his father
eually bewray him. Finn or Fionn, meaning fair, is the name of one of
the mythical ancestors of the aels, while his fathers name,
umhal, signifies the sky, and is the same word as amulus, the
aulish heavengod identified by the omans with ars. is followers are
as doubtfully human as himself. ne may compare them with uchulainn and
the rest of the heroes of Emain acha. Their deeds are not less
marvellous. Like the ltonian warriors, they move, too, on eual terms
with the gods. The Fianna of Erin, says a tract called The ialogue
of the Elders, contained in thirteenth and fourteenth century
manuscripts, had not more freuent and free intercourse with the men of
settled habitation than with the Tuatha  anann. Angus, ider,
Lr, anannn, and odb the ed, with their countless sons and
daughters, loom as large in the Fenian, or socalled ssianic stories
as do the Fenians themselves. They fight for them, or against them they
marry them, and are given to them in marriage.

A luminous suggestion of Professor hys also hints that the Fenians
inherited the conduct of that ancient war formerly waged between the
Tuatha  anann and the Fomors. The most common antagonists of Finn and
his heroes are tribes of invaders from oversea, called in the stories
the Lochlannach. These en of Lochlann are usually identified, by
those who look for history in the stories of the Fenian cycle, with the
invading bands of orsemen who harried the Irish coasts in the ninth
century. ut the nucleus of the Fenian tales antedates these
candinavian raids, and mortal foes have probably merely stepped into
the place of those immortal enemies of the gods whose Lochlann was a
country, not over the seabut under it.

The earlier historians of Ireland were as ready with their dates and
facts regarding the Fenian band as an institution as with the
personality of Finn. It was said to have been first organized by a king
called Fiachadh, in  .., and abolished, or rather, exterminated, by
airbr, the son of ormac mac Art, in  A.. We are told that it
consisted of three regiments modelled on the oman legion each of these
bodies contained, on a peace footing, three thousand men, but in time of
war could be indefinitely strengthened. Its obect was to defend the
coasts of Ireland and the country generally, throwing its weight upon
the side of any prince who happened to be assailed by foreign foes.
uring the six months of winter, its members were uartered upon the
population, but during the summer they had to forage for themselves,
which they did by hunting and fishing. Thus they lived in the woods and
on the open moors, hardening themselves for battle by their adventurous
life. The sites of their enormous campfires were long pointed out under
the name of the Fenians cookingplaces.

It was not easy to become a member of this famous band. A candidate had
to be not only an expert warrior, but a poet and a man of culture as
well. e had practically to renounce his tribe at any rate he made oath
that he would neither avenge any of his relatives nor be avenged by
them. e put himself under bonds never to refuse hospitality to anyone
who asked, never to turn his back in battle, never to insult any woman,
and not to accept a dowry with his wife. In addition to all this, he had
to pass successfully through the most stringent physical tests. Indeed,
as these have come down to us, magnified by the perfervid eltic
imagination, they are of an altogether marvellous and impossible
character. An aspirant to the Fianna Eirinn, we are told, had first to
stand up to his knees in a pit dug for him, his only arms being his
shield and a hazel wand, while nine warriors, each with a spear,
standing within the distance of nine ridges of land, all hurled their
weapons at him at once if he failed to ward them all off, he was
reected. hould he succeed in this first test, he was given the
distance of one treelengths start, and chased through a forest by
armed men if any of them came up to him and wounded him, he could not
belong to the Fenians. If he escaped unhurt, but had unloosed a single
lock of his braided hair, or had broken a single branch in his flight,
or if, at the end of the run, his weapons trembled in his hands, he was
refused. As, besides these tests, he was obliged to ump over a branch
as high as his forehead, and stoop under one as low as his knee, while
running at full speed, and to pluck a thorn out of his heel without
hindrance to his flight, it is clear that even the rank and file of the
Fenians must have been uite exceptional athletes.

ut it is time to pass on to a more detailed description of these
champions. They are a goodly company, not less heroic than the
mighty men of lster. First comes Finn himself, not the strongest in
body of the Fenians, but the truest, wisest, and kindest, gentle to
women, generous to men, and trusted by all. If he could help it, he
would never let anyone be in trouble or poverty. If the dead leaves of
the forest had been gold, and the white foam of the water silver, Finn
would have given it all away.

Finn had two sons, Fergus and his more famous brother ssian.
Fergus of the sweet speech was the Fenians bard, and, also, because of
his honeyed words, their diplomatist and ambassador. Yet, by the irony
of fate, it is to ssian, who is not mentioned as a poet in the earliest
texts, that the poems concerning the Fenians which are current in
cotland under the name of ssianic allads are attributed. ssians
mother was adb, a daughter of odb the ed. A rival goddess changed her
into a deerwhich explains how ssian got his name, which means fawn.
With such advantages of birth, naturally he was speedy enough to run
down a red deer hind and catch her by the ear, though far less
swiftfooted than his cousin aoilte, the Thin an. either was
he so strong as his own son scar, the mightiest of all the Fenians,
yet, in his youth, so clumsy that the rest of the band refused to take
him with them on their warlike expeditions. They changed their minds,
however, when, one day, he followed them unawares, found them giving way
before an enemy, and, rushing to their help, armed only with a great log
of wood which lay handy on the ground, turned the fortunes of the fight.
After this, scar was hailed the best warrior of all the Fianna he was
given command of a battalion, and its banner, called the Terrible
room, was regarded as the centre of every battle, for it was never
known to retreat a foot. ther prominent Fenians were oll, son of
orna, at first Finns enemy but afterwards his follower, a man skilled
alike in war and learning. Even though he was oneeyed, we are told that
he was much loved by women, but not so much as Finns cousin, iarmait
uibhne, whose fatal beauty ensnared even Finns betrothed bride,
rainne. Their comic character was onan, who is represented as an
old, bald, vain, irritable man, as great a braggart as ancient Pistol
and as foulmouthed as Thersites, and yet, after he had once been shamed
into activity, a true man of his hands. These are the prime Fenian
heroes, the chief actors in its stories.

The Fenian epic begins, before the birth of its hero, with the struggle
of two rival clans, each of whom claimed to be the real and only Fianna
Eirinn. They were called the lann orna, of which oll mac orna was
head, and the lann aoisgne, commanded by Finns father, umhal. A
battle was fought at nucha, in which oll killed umhal, and the
lann aoisgne was scattered. umhals wife, however, bore a posthumous
son, who was brought up among the lieve loom ountains secretly, for
fear his fathers enemies should find and kill him. The boy, who was at
first called eimne, grew up to be an expert hurler, swimmer,
runner, and hunter. Later, like uchulainn, and indeed many modern
savages, he took a second, more personal name. Those who saw him asked
who was the fair youth. e accepted the omen, and called himself
eimne Finn.

At length, he wandered to the banks of the oyne, where he found a
soothsayer called Finn the eer living beside a deep pool near lane,
named Fecs Pool, in hope of catching one of the salmons of
knowledge, and, by eating it, obtaining universal wisdom. e had been
there seven years without result, though success had been prophesied to
one named Finn. When the wandering son of umhal appeared, Finn the
eer engaged him as his servant. hortly afterwards, he caught the
coveted fish, and handed it over to our Finn to cook, warning him to eat
no portion of it. ave you eaten any of it he asked the boy, as he
brought it up ready boiled. o indeed, replied Finn but, while I was
cooking it, a blister rose upon the skin, and, laying my thumb down upon
the blister, I scalded it, and so I put it into my mouth to ease the
pain. The man was perplexed. You told me your name was eimne, he
said but have you any other name Yes, I am also called Finn. It
is enough, replied his disappointed master. Eat the salmon yourself,
for you must be the one of whom the prophecy told. Finn ate the salmon
of knowledge, and thereafter he had only to put his thumb under his
tooth, as he had done when he scalded it, to receive foreknowledge and
magic counsel.

Thus armed, Finn was more than a match for the lann orna. urious
legends tell how he discovered himself to his fathers old followers,
confounded his enemies with his magic, and turned them into faithful
servants. Even oll of the lows had to submit to his sway.
radually he welded the two opposing clans into one Fianna, over which
he ruled, taking tribute from the kings of Ireland, warring against the
Fomorian Lochlannach, destroying every kind of giant, serpent, or
monster that infested the land, and at last carrying his mythical
conuests over all Europe.

ut of the numberless stories of the Fenian exploits it is hard to
choose examples. All are heroic, romantic, wild, fantastic. In many of
them the Tuatha  anann play prominent parts. ne such story connects
itself with an earlier mythological episode already related. The reader
will remember how, when the agda gave up the kingship of the
immortals, five aspirants appeared to claim it how of these fiveAngus,
ider, Lr, Ilbhreach son of anannn, and odb the edthe latter was
chosen how Lr refused to acknowledge him, but was reconciled later
how ider, eually rebellious, fled to desert country round ount
Leinster in ounty arlow and how a yearly war was waged upon him and
his people by the rest of the gods to bring them to subection. This war
was still raging in the time of Finn, and ider was not too proud to
seek his help. ne day that Finn was hunting in onegal, with ssian,
scar, aoilte, and iarmait, their hounds roused a beautiful fawn,
which, although at every moment apparently nearly overtaken, led them in
full chase as far as ount Leinster. ere it suddenly disappeared into a
cleft in the hillside. eavy snow, making the forests branches as it
were a withetwist, now fell, forcing the Fenians to seek for some
shelter, and they therefore explored the place into which the fawn had
vanished. It led to a splendid sdh in the hollow of the hill.
Entering it, they were greeted by a beautiful goddessmaiden, who told
them that it was she, iders daughter, who had been the fawn, and that
she had taken that shape purposely to lead them there, in the hope of
getting their help against the army that was coming to attack the
sdh. Finn asked who the assailants would be, and was told that they
were odb the ed with his seven sons, Angus on of the Young with his
seven sons, Lr of dh Fionnechaidh with his twentyseven sons, and
Fionnbharr of dh eadha with his seventeen sons, as well as numberless
gods of lesser fame drawn from sdhe not only over all Ireland, but
from cotland and the islands as well. Finn promised his aid, and, with
the twilight of that same day, the attacking forces appeared, and made
their annual assault. They were beaten off, after a battle that lasted
all night, with the loss of ten men, ten score, and ten hundred. Finn,
scar, and iarmait, as well as most of iders many sons, were sorely
wounded, but the leech Labhra healed all their wounds.

ooth to say, the Fenians did not always reuire the excuse of fairy
alliance to start them making war on the race of the hills. ne of the
socalled ssianic ballads is entitled The hase of the Enchanted
Pigs of Angus of the rugh. This Angus is, of course, the on of
the Young, and the rugh that famous sdh beside the oyne out of
which he cheated his father, the agda. After the friendly manner of
gods towards heroes, he invited Finn and a picked thousand of his
followers to a banuet at the rugh. They came to it in their finest
clothes, goblets went from hand to hand, and waiters were kept in
motion. At last conversation fell upon the comparative merits of the
pleasures of the table and of the chase, Angus stoutly contending that
the gods life of perpetual feasting was better than all the Fenian
huntings, and Finn as stoutly denying it. Finn boasted of his hounds,
and Angus said that the best of them could not kill one of his pigs.
Finn angrily replied that his two hounds, ran and geolan,
would kill any pig that trod on dry land. Angus answered that he could
show Finn a pig that none of his hounds or huntsmen could catch or kill.
ere were the makings of a pretty uarrel among such inflammable
creatures as gods and heroes, but the steward of the feast interposed
and sent everyone to bed. The next morning, Finn left the rugh, for he
did not want to fight all Anguss fairies with his handful of a thousand
men. A year passed before he heard more of it then came a messenger
from Angus, reminding Finn of his promise to pit his men and hounds
against Anguss pigs. The Fenians seated themselves on the tops of the
hills, each with his favourite hound in leash, and they had not been
there long before there appeared on the eastern plain a hundred and one
such pigs as no Fenian had ever seen before. Each was as tall as a deer,
and blacker than a smiths coals, having hair like a thicket and
bristles like ships masts. Yet such was the prowess of the Fenians that
they killed them all, though each of the pigs slew ten men and many
hounds. Then Angus complained that the Fenians had murdered his son and
many others of the Tuatha  anann, who, indeed, were none other than
the pigs whose forms they had taken. There were mighty recriminations on
both sides, and, in the end, the enraged Fenians prepared to attack the
rugh on the oyne. Then only did Angus begin to yield, and, by the
advice of ssian, Finn made peace with him and his fairy folk.

uch are specimens of the tales which go to make up the Fenian cycle of
sagas. unting is the most prominent feature of them, for the Fenians
were essentially a race of mighty hunters. ut the creatures of their
chase were not always flesh and blood. Enchanters who wished the Fenians
ill could always lure them into danger by taking the shape of boar or
deer, and many a story begins with an innocent chase and ends with a
murderous battle. ut out of such struggles the Fenians always emerge
successfully, as ssian is represented proudly boasting, through
truthfulness and the might of their hands.

The most famous chase of all is, however, not that of deer or boar, but
of a woman and a man, Finns betrothed wife and his nephew
iarmait. Ever fortunate in war, the Fenian leader found disaster
in his love. Wishing for a wife in his old age, he sent to seek rainne,
the daughter of ormac, the ighing of Ireland. oth ing ormac and
his daughter consented, and Finns ambassadors returned with an
invitation to the suitor to come in a fortnights time to claim his
bride. e arrived with his picked band, and was received in state in the
great banuetinghall of Tara. There they feasted, and there rainne,
the kings daughter, casting her eyes over the assembled Fenian heroes,
saw iarmait uibhne.

This Fenian Adonis had a beautyspot upon his cheek which no woman could
see without falling instantly in love with him. rainne, for all her
royal birth, was no exception to this rule. he asked a druid to point
her out the principal guests. The druid told her all their names and
exploits. Then she called for a ewelled drinkinghorn, and, filling it
with a drugged wine, sent it round to each in turn, except to iarmait.
one could be so discourteous as to refuse wine from the hand of a
princess. All drank, and fell into deep sleep.

Then, rising, she came to iarmait, told him her passion for him, and
asked for its return. I will not love the betrothed of my chief, he
replied, and, even if I wished, I dare not. And he praised Finns
virtues, and decried his own fame. ut rainne merely answered that she
put him under geasa bonds which no hero could refuse to redeem to
flee with her and at once went back to her chair before the rest of the
company awoke from their slumber.

After the feast, iarmait went round to his comrades, one by one, and
told them of rainnes love for him, and of the geasa she had placed
upon him to take her from Tara. e asked each of them what he ought to
do. All answered that no hero could break a geis put upon him by a
woman. e even asked Finn, concealing rainnes name, and Finn gave him
the same counsel as the others. That night, the lovers fled from Tara to
the ford of the hannon at Athlone, crossed it, and came to a place
called the Wood of the Two Tents, where iarmait wove a hut of
branches for rainne to shelter in.

eanwhile Finn had discovered their flight, and his rage knew no bounds.
e sent his trackers, the lann eamhuain, to follow them. They
tracked them to the wood, and one of them climbed a tree, and, looking
down, saw the hut, with a strong sevendoored fence built round it, and
iarmait and rainne inside. When the news came to the Fenians, they
were sorry, for their sympathies were with iarmait and not with Finn.
They tried to warn him, but he took no heed for he had determined to
fight and not to flee. Indeed, when Finn himself came to the fence, and
called over it to iarmait, asking if he and rainne were within, he
replied that they were, but that none should enter unless he gave
permission.

o iarmait, like uchulainn in the war of lster against Ireland, found
himself matched singlehanded against a host. ut, also like uchulainn,
he had a divine helper. The favourite of the Tuatha  anann, he had
been the pupil of anannn son of Lr in the Land of Promise, and had
been fostered by Angus of the rugh. anannn had given him his two
spears, the ed avelin and the Yellow avelin, and his two swords,
the reat Fury and the Little Fury. And now Angus came to look for
his fosterson, and brought with him the magic mantle of invisibility
used by the gods. e advised iarmait and rainne to come out wrapped in
the cloak, and thus rendered invisible. iarmait still refused to flee,
but asked Angus to protect rainne. Wrapping the magic mantle round her,
the god led the princess away unseen by any of the Fenians.

y this time, Finn had posted men outside all the seven doors in the
fence. iarmait went to each of them in turn. At the first, were ssian
and scar with the lann aoisgne. They offered him their protection. At
the second, were aoilte and the lann onan, who said they would fight
to the death for him. At the third, were onan and the lann orna, also
his friends. At the fourth, stood uan with the Fenians of unster,
iarmaits native province. At the fifth, were the lster Fenians, who
also promised him protection against Finn. ut at the sixth, were the
lann eamhuain, who hated him and at the seventh, was Finn himself.

It is by your door that I will pass out,  Finn, cried iarmait. Finn
charged his men to surround iarmait as he came out, and kill him. ut
he leaped the fence, passing clean over their heads, and fled away so
swiftly that they could not follow him. e never halted till he reached
the place to which he knew Angus had taken rainne. The friendly god
left them with a little sage advice never to hide in a tree with only
one trunk never to rest in a cave with only one entrance never to land
on an island with only one channel of approach not to eat their supper
where they had cooked it, nor to sleep where they had supped, and, where
they had slept once, never to sleep again. With these edIndianlike
tactics, it was some time before Finn discovered them.

owever, he found out at last where they were, and sent champions with
venomous hounds to take or kill them. ut iarmait conuered all who
were sent against him.

Yet still Finn pursued, until iarmait, as a last hope of escape, took
refuge under a magic uickentree, which bore scarlet fruit, the
ambrosia of the gods. It had grown from a single berry dropped by one of
the Tuatha  anann, who, when they found that they had carelessly
endowed mortals with celestial and immortal food, had sent a huge,
oneeyed Fomor called harvan the urly to guard it, so that no man
might eat of its fruit. All day, this Fomor sat at the foot of the tree,
and, all night, he slept among its branches, and so terrible was his
appearance that neither the Fenians nor any other people dared to come
within several miles of him.

ut iarmait was willing to brave the Fomor in the hope of getting a
safe hidingplace for rainne. e came boldly up to him, and asked leave
to camp and hunt in his neighbourhood. The Fomor told him surlily that
he might camp and hunt where he pleased, so long as he refrained from
taking any of the scarlet berries. o iarmait built a hut near a
spring and he and rainne lived there, killing the wild animals for
food.

ut, unhappily, rainne conceived so strong a desire to eat the uicken
berries that she felt that she must die unless her wish could be
gratified. At first she tried to hide this longing, but in the end she
was forced to tell her companion. iarmait had no desire to uarrel with
the Fomor so he went to him and told the plight that rainne was in,
and asked for a handful of the berries as a gift.

ut the Fomor merely answered I swear to you that if nothing would
save the princess and her unborn child except my berries, and if she
were the last woman upon the earth, she should not have any of them.
Whereupon iarmait fought the Fomor, and, after much trouble, killed
him.

It was reported to Finn that the guardian of the magic uickentree
lived no longer, and he guessed that iarmait must have killed him so
he came down to the place with seven battalions of the Fenians to look
for him. y this time, iarmait had abandoned his own hut and taken
possession of that built by the Fomor among the branches of the magic
uicken. e was sitting in it with rainne when Finn and his men came
and camped at the foot of the tree, to wait till the heat of noon had
passed before beginning their search.

To beguile the time, Finn called for his chessboard and challenged his
son ssian to a game. They played until ssian had only one more move.

ne move would make you a winner, said Finn to him, but I challenge
you and all the Fenians to guess it.

nly iarmait, who had been looking down through the branches upon the
players, knew the move. e could not resist dropping a berry on to the
board, so deftly that it hit the very chessman which ssian ought to
move in order to win. ssian took the hint, moved it, and won. A second
and a third game were played and in each case the same thing happened.
Then Finn felt sure that the berries that had prompted ssian must have
been thrown by iarmait.

e called out, asking iarmait if he were there, and the Fenian hero,
who never spoke an untruth, answered that he was. o the uickentree
was surrounded by armed men, ust as the fenced hut in the woods had
been. ut, again, things happened in the same way for Angus of the
rugh took away rainne wrapped in the invisible magic cloak, while
iarmait, walking to the end of a thick branch, cleared the circle of
Fenians at a bound, and escaped untouched.

This was the end of the famous Pursuit for Angus came as ambassador
to Finn, urging him to become reconciled to the fugitives, and all the
best of the Fenians begged Finn to consent. o iarmait and rainne were
allowed to return in peace.

ut Finn never really forgave, and, soon after, he urged iarmait to go
out to the chase of the wild boar of enn ulban. iarmait killed
the boar without getting any hurt for, like the reek Achilles, he was
invulnerable, save in his heel alone. Finn, who knew this, told him to
measure out the length of the skin with his bare feet. iarmait did so.
Then Finn, declaring that he had measured it wrongly, ordered him to
tread it again in the opposite direction. This was against the lie of
the bristles and one of them pierced iarmaits heel, and inflicted a
poisoned and mortal wound.

This Pursuit of iarmait and rainne, which has been told at such
length, marks in some degree the climax of the Fenian power, after which
it began to decline towards its end. The friends of iarmait never
forgave the treachery with which Finn had compassed his death. The
everslumbering rivalry between oll and his lann orna and Finn and
his lann aoisgne began to show itself as open enmity. uarrels arose,
too, between the Fenians and the ighings of Ireland, which culminated
at last in the annihilation of the Fianna at the battle of abhra.

This is said to have been fought in A.. . Finn himself had perished
a year before it, in a skirmish with rebellious Fenians at the Ford of
rea on the oyne. ing ormac the agnificent, rainnes father, was
also dead. It was between Finns grandson scar and ormacs son airbr
that war broke out. This mythical battle was as fiercely waged as that
of Arthurs last fight at amlan. scar slew airbr, and was slain by
him. Almost all the Fenians fell, as well as all airbrs forces.

nly two of the greater Fenian figures survived. ne was aoilte, whose
swiftness of foot saved him at the end when all was lost. The famous
story, called the ialogue of the Elders, represents him discoursing
to t. Patrick, centuries after, of the Fenians wonderful deeds. aving
lost his friends of the heroic age, he is said to have cast in his lot
with the Tuatha  anann. e fought in a battle, with Ilbhreach son of
anannn, against Lr himself, and killed the ancient seagod with his
own hand. The tale represents him taking possession of Lrs fairy
palace of dh Fionnechaidh, after which we know no more of him, except
that he has taken rank in the minds of the Irish peasantry as one of,
and a ruler among, the dhe.

The other was ssian, who did not fight at abhra, for, long before, he
had taken the great ourney which most heroes of mythology take, to that
bourne from which no ordinary mortal ever returns. Like uchulainn, it
was upon the invitation of a goddess that he went. The Fenians were
hunting near Lake illarney when a lady of more than human beauty came
to them, and told them that her name was iamh, daughter of the on
of the ea. The aelic poet, ichael omyn, who, in the eighteenth
century, rewove the ancient story into his own words, describes her
in ust the same way as one of the old bards would have done

          A royal crown was on her head
           And a brown mantle of precious silk,
           pangled with stars of red gold,
           overing her shoes down to the grass.

          A gold ring was hanging down
           From each yellow curl of her golden hair
           er eyes, blue, clear, and cloudless,
           Like a dewdrop on the top of the grass.

          edder were her cheeks than the rose,
           Fairer was her visage than the swan upon the wave,
           And more sweet was the taste of her balsam lips
           Than honey mingled thro red wine.

          A garment, wide, long, and smooth
           overed the white steed,
           There was a comely saddle of red gold,
           And her right hand held a bridle with a golden bit.

          Four shoes wellshaped were under him,
           f the yellow gold of the purest uality
           A silver wreath was on the back of his head,
           And there was not in the world a steed better.

uch was iamh of the olden air, anannns daughter and it is small
wonder that, when she chose ssian from among the sons of men to be her
lover, all Finns supplications could not keep him. e mounted behind
her on her fairy horse, and they rode across the land to the seashore,
and then over the tops of the waves. As they went, she described the
country of the gods to him in ust the same terms as anannn himself
had pictured it to ran, son of Febal, as ider had painted it to Etain,
and as everyone that went there limned it to those that stayed at home
on earth.

        It is the most delightful country to be found
         f greatest repute under the sun
         Trees drooping with fruit and blossom,
         And foliage growing on the tops of boughs.

        Abundant, there, are honey and wine,
         And everything that eye has beheld,
         There will not come decline on thee with lapse of time.
         eath or decay thou wilt not see.

As they went they saw wonders. Fairy palaces with bright sunbowers and
limewhite walls appeared on the surface of the sea. At one of these
they halted, and ssian, at iamhs reuest, attacked a fierce Fomor who
lived there, and set free a damsel of the Tuatha  anann whom he kept
imprisoned. e saw a hornless fawn leap from wave to wave, chased by one
of those strange hounds of eltic myth which are pure white, with red
ears. At last they reached the Land of the Young, and there ssian
dwelt with iamh for three hundred years before he remembered Erin and
the Fenians. Then a great wish came upon him to see his own country and
his own people again, and iamh gave him leave to go, and mounted him
upon a fairy steed for the ourney. ne thing alone she made him
swearnot to let his feet touch earthly soil. ssian promised, and
reached Ireland on the wings of the wind. ut, like the children of Lr
at the end of their penance, he found all changed. e asked for Finn and
the Fenians, and was told that they were the names of people who had
lived long ago, and whose deeds were written of in old books. The attle
of abhra had been fought, and t. Patrick had come to Ireland, and made
all things new. The very forms of men had altered they seemed dwarfs
compared with the giants of his day. eeing three hundred of them trying
in vain to raise a marble slab, he rode up to them in contemptuous
kindness, and lifted it with one hand. ut, as he did so, the golden
saddlegirth broke with the strain, and he touched the earth with his
feet. The fairy horse vanished, and ssian rose from the ground, no
longer divinely young and fair and strong, but a blind, grayhaired,
withered old man.

A number of spirited ballads tell how ssian, stranded in his old
age upon earthly soil, unable to help himself or find his own food, is
taken by t. Patrick into his house to be converted. The saint paints to
him in the brightest colours the heaven which may be his own if he will
but repent, and in the darkest the hell in which he tells him his old
comrades now lie in anguish. ssian replies to the saints arguments,
entreaties, and threats in language which is extraordinarily frank. e
will not believe that heaven could be closed to the Fenians if they
wished to enter it, or that od himself would not be proud to claim
friendship with Finn. And if it be not so, what is the use to him of
eternal life where there is no hunting, or wooing fair women, or
listening to the songs and tales of bards o, he will go to the
Fenians, whether they sit at the feast or in the fire and so he dies as
he had lived.



Footnote 

  The translations of Fenian stories are numerous. The reader will find
  many of them popularly retold in Lady regorys ods and Fighting
  en. Thence he may pass on to r. tandish ayes radys ilva
  adelica the Waifs and trays of eltic Tradition, especially ol.
  I r. . . ampbells The Fians as well as the volumes of the
  evue eltiue and the Transactions of the ssianic ociety.

Footnote 

  ee urrys translation in Appendix III to his . aterials.

Footnote 

  The story, found in the ook of the un ow, appears in French in e
  ubainvilles pope eltiue.

Footnote 

  This famous story is told in several . of the fourteenth and
  fifteenth centuries. For translations see r. Whitley tokes, Irische
  Texte, and tandish ayes rady, Transactions of the ssianic
  ociety, ol. III.

Footnote 

  In aelic spelling, Fionn mac umhail.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Fna.

Footnote 

  urry . aterials, Lecture I, p. .

Footnote 

  Pronounced oul or ooal.

Footnote 

  Agalamh na enrach. nder the title The ollouy of the Ancients,
  there is an excellent translation of it, from the ook of Lismore, in
  tandish ayes radys ilva adelica.

Footnote 

  rady ilva adelica.

Footnote 

  ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  ee The Enumeration of Finns ousehold, translated by rady in
  ilva adelica.

Footnote 

  For a good account, see . . ampbells The Fians, pp. .

Footnote 

  In more correct spelling, isin, and pronounced sheen or
  Isheen.

Footnote 

  Pronounced ylta or weeltia.

Footnote 

  Pronounced aul.

Footnote 

  Pronounced ermat yna.

Footnote 

  Pronounced rania.

Footnote 

  Pronounced askin.

Footnote 

  ow astleknock, near ublin.

Footnote 

  Pronounced emna.

Footnote 

  This and other boyexploits of Finn mac umhail are contained in a
  little tract written upon a fragment of the ninth century Psalter of
  ashel. It is translated in ol. I of the Transactions of the
  ssianic ociety.

Footnote 

  ampbells Fians, p. .

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe ods in Exile.

Footnote 

  From the ollouy of the Ancients in radys ilva adelica.

Footnote 

  It is translated in ol. I of the Transactions of the ssianic
  ociety.

Footnote 

  Pronounced rn, not rn.

Footnote 

  Pronounced klaun or colaing.

Footnote 

  A fine translation of the Pursuit of iarmait and rainne has been
  published by . . rady in ol. III of the Transactions of the
  ssianic ociety.

Footnote 

  Pronounced avin or owin.

Footnote 

  The mountainash, or rowan.

Footnote 

  ow called enbulben. It is near ligo.

Footnote 

  Pronounced avra.

Footnote 

  ee radys ilva adelica.

Footnote 

  Pronounced eeav.

Footnote 

  The Lay of isin in the Land of Youth, translated by rian Looney
  for the ssianic ocietyTransactions, ol. I. A fine modern poem
  on the same subect is W. . Yeats Wanderings of isin.

Footnote 

  ee the Transactions of the ssianic ociety. They are generally
  called the ialogues of isin and Patrick.






                               APTE 

                    TE ELIE A FALL F TE 


In spite, however, of the widespread popularity of the ballads that
took the form of dialogues between ssian and Patrick, certain
traditions say that the saint succeeded in converting the hero. aoilt,
the other great surviving Fenian, was also represented as having gladly
exchanged his pagan lore for the faith and salvation offered him. We may
see the same influence on foot in the later legends concerning the ed
ranch hampions. It was the policy of the first hristianizers of
Ireland to describe the loved heroes of their still halfheathen flocks
as having handed in their submission to the new creed. The tales about
onchobar and uchulainn were amended, to prove that those very pagan
personages had been miraculously brought to accept the gospel at the
last. An entirely new story told how the latter hero was raised from the
dead by aint Patrick that he might bear witness of the truth of
hristianity to Laogaire the econd, ing of Ireland, which he did with
such fervour and elouence that the sceptical monarch was
convinced.

aring attempts were also made to change the Tuatha  anann from pagan
gods into hristian saints, but these were by no means so profitable as
the policy pursued towards the more humanseeming heroes. With one of
them alone, was success immediate and brilliant. rigit, the goddess of
fire, poetry, and the hearth, is famous today as aint ridget, or
ride. ost popular of all the Irish saints, she can still be easily
recognized as the daughter of the agda. er hristian attributes,
almost all connected with fire, attest her pagan origin. he was
born at sunrise a house in which she dwelt blazed into a flame which
reached to heaven a pillar of fire rose from her head when she took the
veil and her breath gave new life to the dead. As with the ritish
goddess ul, worshipped at ath, whothe first century Latin writer
olinus tells usruled over the boiling springs, and at her altar
there flamed a perpetual fire which never whitened into ashes, but
hardened into a stony mass, the sacred flame on her shrine at ildare
was never allowed to go out. It was extinguished once, in the thirteenth
century, but was relighted, and burnt with undying glow until the
suppression of the monasteries by enry the Eighth. This sacred fire
might not be breathed on by the impure human breath. For nineteen nights
it was tended by her nuns, but on the twentieth night it was left
untouched, and kept itself alight miraculously. With so little of her
essential character and ritual changed, it is small wonder that the
halfpagan, halfhristian Irish gladly accepted the new saint in the
stead of the old goddess.

oubtless a careful examination of Irish hagiology would result in the
discovery of many other saints whose names and attributes might render
them suspect of previous careers as pagan gods. ut their acceptation
was not sufficiently general to do away with the need of other means of
counteracting the still living influence of the aelic Pantheon.
Therefore a fresh school of euhemerists arose to prove that the gods
were never even saints, but merely worldly men who had once lived and
ruled in Erin. Learned monks worked hard to construct a history of
Ireland from the Flood downwards. r. Eugene urry has compiled from
the various pedigrees they elaborated, and inserted into the books of
allymote, Lecan, and Leinster an amazing genealogy which shows how, not
merely the Tuatha  anann, but also the Fir olgs, the Fomors, the
ilesians, and the races of Partholon and emed were descended from
oah. aphet, the patriarchs son, was the father of agog, from whom
came two lines, the first being the ilesians, while the second branched
out into all the other races.

aving once worked the gods, first into universal history, and then into
the history of Ireland, it was an easy matter to supply them with dates
of birth and death, local habitations, and places of burial. We are told
with precision exactly how long uada, the agda, Lugh, and the others
reigned at Tara. The barrows by the oyne provided them with comfortable
tombs. Their enemies, the Fomors, became real invaders who were beaten
in real battles. Thus it was thought to make plain prose of their
divinities.

It is only fair, however, to these early euhemerists to say that they
have their modern disciples. There are many writers, of recognized
authority upon their subects, who, in dealing with the history of
Ireland or the composition of the ritish race, claim to find real
peoples in the tribes mentioned in aelic myth. nfortunately, the only
point they agree upon is the accepted onethat the ilesians were
Aryan elts. They are divided upon the uestion of the Fir olgs, in
whom some see the preAryan tribes, while others, led astray by the
name, regard them as elgic auls and over the really mythological
races they run wild. In the Tuatha  anann are variously found aels,
Picts, anes, candinavians, Ligurians, and Finns, while the Fomors rest
under the suspicion of having been Iberians, oors, omans, Finns,
oths, or Teutons. As for the people of Partholon and emed, they have
even been explained as men of the Palolithic Age. This chaos of opinion
was fortunately avoided by the native annalists, who had no particular
views upon the uestion of race, except that everybody came from
pain.

f course there were dissenters from this prevailing mania for
euhemerization. As late as the tenth century, a poet called Eochaid
Flynn, writing of the Tuatha  anann, at first seems to hesitate
whether to ascribe humanity or divinity to them, and at last frankly
avows their godhead. In his poem, preserved in the ook of
allymote, he says

        Though they came to learned Erinn
         Without buoyant, adventurous ships,
         o man in creation knew
         Whether they were of the earth or of the sky.

        If they were diabolical demons,
         They came from that woeful expulsion
         If they were of a race of tribes and nations,
         If they were human, they were of the race of eothach.

Then he enumerates them in due succession, and ends by declaring

        Though I have treated of these deities in their order,
         Yet I have not adored them.

ne may surmise with probability that the common people agreed rather
with the poet than with the monk. Pious men in monasteries might write
what they liked, but mere laymen would not be easily persuaded that
their cherished gods had never been anything more than men like
themselves. Probably they said little, but acted in secret according to
their inherited ideas. Let it be granted, for the sake of peace, that
oibniu was only a man none the less, his name was known to be
uncommonly effective in an incantation. This applied eually to
iancecht, and invocations to both of them are contained in some verses
which an eighthcentury Irish monk wrote on the margin of a manuscript
still preserved at t. all, in witzerland. ome prescriptions of
iancechts have come down to us, but it must be admitted that they
hardly differ from those current among ordinary medival physicians.
Perhaps, after that unfortunate spilling of the herbs that grew out of
iachs body, he had to fall back upon empirical research. e invented a
porridge for the relief of ailments of the body, as cold, phlegm,
throat cats, and the presence of living things in the body, as worms
it was compounded of hazel buds, dandelion, chickweed, sorrel, and
oatmeal and was to be taken every morning and evening. e also
prescribed against the effects of witchcraft and the fourteen diseases
of the stomach.

oibniu, in addition to his original character as the divine smith and
sorcerer, gained a third reputation among the Irish as a great builder
and bridgemaker. As such he is known as the obhan aer, that is,
oibniu the Architect, and marvellous tales, current all over Ireland
attest his prowess.

           en calld him obhan aer, and many a tale
              Yet lingers in the byways of the land
            f how he cleft the rock, or down the vale
              Led the bright river, childlike, in his hand
            f how on giant ships he spread great sail,
              And many marvels else by him first plannd,

writes a poet of modern Ireland. Especially were the round towers
attributed to him, and the hristian clerics appropriated his popularity
by describing him as having been the designer of their churches. e
used, according to legend, to wander over the country, clad, like the
reek ephaestus, whom he resembles, in working dress, seeking
commissions and adventures. is works remain in the cathedrals and
churches of Ireland and, with regard to his adventures, many strange
legends are still, or were until very recently, current upon the lips of
old people in remote parts of Ireland.

ome of these are, as might have been expected, nothing more than
halfunderstood recollections of the ancient mythology. In them appear
as characters others of the old, yet not uite forgotten godsLugh,
anannn, and alornames still remembered as those of longpast druids,
heroes, and kings of Ireland in the misty olden time.

ne or two of them are worth retelling. r. William Larminie,
collecting folktales in Achill Island, took one from the lips of an
aged peasant, which tells in its confused way what might almost be
called the central incident of aelic mythology, the mysterious birth of
the sungod from demoniac parentage, and his eventual slaying of his
grandfather when he came to full age.

obhan the Architect and his son, young obhan, runs the tale, were sent
for by alor of the lows to build him a palace. They built it so well
that alor decided never to let them leave his kingdom alive, for fear
they should build another one eually good for someone else. e
therefore had all the scaffolding removed from round the palace while
they were still on the top, with the intention of leaving them up there
to die of hunger. ut, when they discovered this, they began to destroy
the roof, so that alor was obliged to let them come down.

e, none the less, refused to allow them to return to Ireland. The
crafty obhan, however, had his plan ready. e told alor that the
inury that had been done to the palace roof could not be repaired
without special tools, which he had left behind him at home. alor
declined to let either old obhan or young obhan go back to fetch them
but he offered to send his own son. obhan gave alors son directions
for the ourney. e was to travel until he came to a house with a stack
of corn at the door. Entering it, he would find a woman with one hand
and a child with one eye.

alors son found the house, and asked the woman for the tools. he
expected him for it had been arranged between obhan and his wife what
should be done, if alor refused to let him return. he took alors son
to a huge chest, and told him that the tools were at the bottom of it,
so far down that she could not reach them, and that he must get into the
chest, and pick them up himself. ut, as soon as he was safely inside,
she shut the lid on him, telling him that he would have to stay there
until his father allowed old obhan and young obhan to come home with
their pay. And she sent the same message to alor himself.

There was an exchange of prisoners, alor giving the two obhans their
pay and a ship to take them home, and obhans wife releasing alors
son. ut, before the two builders went, alor asked them whom he should
now employ to repair his palace. ld obhan told him that, next to
himself, there was no workman in Ireland better than one avideen o.

When obhan got back to Ireland, he sent avideen o to alor. ut he
gave him a piece of adviceto accept as pay only one thing alors gray
cow, which would fill twenty barrels at one milking. alor agreed to
this, but, when he gave the cow to avideen o to take back with him to
Ireland, he omitted to include her byrerope, which was the only thing
that would keep her from returning to her original owner.

The gray cow gave so much trouble to avideen o by her straying, that
he was obliged to hire military champions to watch her during the day
and bring her safely home at night. The bargain made was that avideen
o should forge the champion a sword for his pay, but that, if he lost
the cow, his life was to be forfeited.

At last, a certain warrior called ian was unlucky enough to let the cow
escape. e followed her tracks down to the seashore and right to the
edge of the waves, and there he lost them altogether. e was tearing his
hair in his perplexity, when he saw a man rowing a coracle. The man, who
was no other than anannn son of Lr, came in close to the shore, and
asked what was the matter.

ian told him.

What would you give to anyone who would take you to the place where the
gray cow is asked anannn.

I have nothing to give, replied ian.

All I ask, said anannn, is half of whatever you gain before you
come back.

ian agreed to that willingly enough, and anannn told him to get into
the coracle. In the wink of an eye, he had landed him in alors
kingdom, the realm of the cold, where they roast no meat, but eat their
food raw. ian was not used to this diet, so he lit himself a fire, and
began to cook some food. alor saw the fire, and came down to it, and he
was so pleased that he appointed ian to be his firemaker and cook.

ow alor had a daughter, of whom a druid had prophesied that she would,
some day, bear a son who would kill his grandfather. Therefore, like
Acrisius, in reek legend, he shut her up in a tower, guarded by women,
and allowed her to see no man but himself. ne day, ian saw alor go to
the tower. e waited until he had come back, and then went to explore.
e had the gift of opening locked doors and shutting them again after
him. When he got inside, he lit a fire, and this novelty so delighted
alors daughter that she invited him to visit her again. After thisin
the Achill islanders uaint phrasehe was ever coming there, until a
child happened to her. alors daughter gave the baby to ian to take
away. he also gave him the byrerope which belonged to the gray cow.

ian was in great danger now, for alor had found out about the child.
e led the gray cow away with the rope to the seashore, and waited for
anannn. The on of Lr had told ian that, when he was in any
difficulty, he was to think of him, and he would at once appear. ian
thought of him now, and, in a moment, anannn appeared with his
coracle. ian got into the boat, with the baby and the gray cow, ust as
alor, in hot pursuit, came down to the beach.

alor, by his incantations, raised a great storm to drown them but
anannn, whose druidism was greater, stilled it. Then alor turned the
sea into fire, to burn them but anannn put it out with a stone.

When they were safe back in Ireland, anannn asked ian for his
promised reward.

I have gained nothing but the boy, and I cannot cut him in two, so I
will give him to you whole, he replied.

That is what I was wanting all the time, said anannn when he grows
up, there will be no champion eual to him.

o anannn baptized the boy, calling him the ulauna. This name,
meaning lindtubborn, is certainly a curious corruption of the
original Ioldanach aster of all nowledge. When the boy had
grown up, he went one day to the seashore. A ship came past, in which
was a man. The traditions of onnybrook Fair are evidently prehistoric,
for the boy, without troubling to ask who the stranger was, took a dart
out of his pocket, hurled it, and hit him. The man in the boat
happened to be alor. Thus, in accordance with the prophecy, he was
slain by his grandson, who, though the folktale does not name him, was
obviously Lugh.

Another version of the same legend, collected by the Irish scholar
onovan on the coast of onegal, opposite alor s favourite haunt,
Tory Island, is interesting as completing the one ust narrated. In
this folktale, oibniu is called avida, and is made one of three
brothers, the other two being called ac ineely and ac amthainn. They
were chiefs of onegal, smiths and farmers, while alor was a robber who
harassed the mainland from his stronghold on Tory Island. The gray cow
belonged to ac ineely, and alor stole it. Its owner determined to be
revenged, and, knowing the prediction concerning alors death at the
hands of an as yet unborn grandson, he persuaded a kindly fairy to
spirit him in female disguise to Tor or, where alors daughter, who
was called Ethnea, was kept imprisoned. The result of this expedition
was not merely the one son necessary to fulfil the prophecy, but three.
This apparent superfluity was fortunate for alor drowned two of them,
the other being picked out of the sea by the same fairy who had been
incidentally responsible for his birth, and handed over to his father,
ac ineely, to be brought up. hortly after this, alor managed to
capture ac ineely, and, in retaliation for the wrong done him, chopped
off his head upon a large white stone, still known locally as the tone
of ineely. atisfied with this, and uite unaware that one of his
daughters children had been saved from death, and was now being brought
up as a smith by avida, alor went on with his career of robbery,
varying it by visits to the forge to purchase arms. ne day, being there
during avidas absence, he began boasting to the young assistant of how
he had compassed ac ineelys death. e never finished the story, for
Lughwhich was the boys namesnatched a redhot iron from the fire, and
thrust it into alors eye, and through his head.

Thus, in these two folktales, gathered in different parts of
Ireland, at different times, by different persons, survives uite a mass
of mythological detail only to be found otherwise in ancient manuscripts
containing still more ancient matter. rystallized in them may be found
the names of six members of the old aelic Pantheon, each filling the
same part as of old. oibniu has not lost his mastery of smithcraft
alor is still the Fomorian king of the cold regions of the sea his
daughter Ethniu becomes, by ian, the mother of the sungod Lugh, who
still bears his old title of Ioldanach, though it is strangely
corrupted into a name meaning almost the exact opposite, is still
fostered by anannn, on of the ea, and in the end grows up to destroy
his grandfather by a blow in the one vulnerable place, his deathdealing
eye. Perhaps, too, we may claim to see a genuine, though umbled
tradition, in the Fomorlike deformities of obhans wife and child, and
in the story of the gray cow and her byrerope, which recalls that of
the agdas blackmaned heifer, cean.

The memories of the peasantry still hold many stories of Lugh, as well
as of Angus, and others of the old gods. ut, next to the obhan aer,
the one whose fame is still greatest is that everpotent and
everpopular figure, the great anannn.

The last, perhaps, to receive open adoration, he is represented by
kindly tradition as having been still content to help and watch over the
people who had reected and ceased to worship him. p to the time of t.
olumba, he was the special guardian of Irishmen in foreign parts,
assisting them in their dangers and bringing them home safe. For the
peasantry, too, he caused favourable weather and good crops. is fairy
subects tilled the ground while men slept. ut this is said to have
come to an end at last. aint olumba, having broken his golden chalice,
gave it to a servant to get repaired. n his way, the servant was met by
a stranger, who asked him where he was going. The man told him, and
showed him the chalice. The stranger breathed upon it, and, at once, the
broken parts reunited. Then he begged him to return to his master, give
him the chalice, and tell him that anannn son of Lr, who had mended
it, desired to know in very truth whether he would ever attain paradise.
Alas, said the ungrateful saint, there is no forgiveness for a man
who does such works as this The servant went back with the answer, and
anannn, when he heard it, broke out into indignant lament. Woe is me,
anannn mac Lr for years Ive helped the atholics of Ireland, but
Ill do it no more, till theyre as weak as water. Ill go to the gray
waves in the ighlands of cotland.

And there he remained. For, unless the charming stories of iss Fiona
acleod are mere beautiful imaginings and nothing more, he is not
unknown even today among the solitary shepherds and fishers of the
farthest ebrides. In the ontemporary eview for ctober, ,
she tells how an old man of fourscore years would often be visited in
his shieling by a tall, beautiful stranger, with a crest on his head,
like white canna blowing in the wind, but with a blueness in it, and
a bright, cold, curling flame under the soles of his feet. The man
told him many things, and prophesied to him the time of his death.
enerally, the strangers hands were hidden in the folds of the white
cloak he wore, but, once, he moved to touch the shepherd, who saw then
that his flesh was like water, with seaweed floating among the bones.
o that urdo acIan knew that he could be speaking with none other than
the on of the ea.

or is he yet uite forgotten in his own Island of an, of which local
tradition says he was the first inhabitant. e is also described as its
king, who kept it from invasion by his magic. e would cause mists to
rise at any moment and conceal the island, and by the same glamour he
could make one man seem like a hundred, and little chips of wood which
he threw into the water to appear like ships of war. It is no wonder
that he held his kingdom against allcomers, until his sway was ended,
like that of the other aelic gods, by the arrival of aint Patrick.
After this, he seems to have declined into a traditionary giant who used
to leap from Peel astle to ontrary ead for exercise, or hurl huge
rocks, upon which the mark of his hand can still be seen. It is said
that he took no tribute from his subects, or worshippers except bundles
of green rushes, which were placed every idsummer Eve upon two mountain
peaks, one called Warrefield in olden days, but now outh arrule, and
the other called an, and not now to be identified. is grave, which is
thirty yards long, is pointed out, close to Peel astle. The most
curious legend connected with him, however, tells us that he had three
legs, on which he used to travel at a great pace. ow this was done may
be seen from the arms of the island, on which are pictured his three
limbs, oined together, and spread out like the spokes of a wheel.

An Irish tradition tells us that, when anannn left Ireland for
cotland, the vacant kingship of the gods or fairies was taken by one
ac oineanta, to the great grief of those who had known anannn.
Perhaps this great grief led to ac oineantas being deposed, for the
present king of the Irish fairies is Finvarra, the same Fionnbharr to
whom the agda allotted the sdh of eadha after the conuest of the
Tuatha  anann by the ilesians, and who takes a prominent part in the
Fenian stories. o great is the persistence of tradition in Ireland that
this hill of eadha, now spelt nockma, is still considered to be the
abode of him and his ueen, nagh. umberless stories are told about
Finvarra, including, of course, that very favourite eltic tale of the
stolen bride, and her recapture from the fairies by the siege and
digging up of the sdh in which she was held prisoner. Finvarra, like
ider of ri Leith, carried away a human Etainthe wife, not of a high
king, but of an Irish lord. The modern Eochaid Airem, having heard an
invisible voice tell him where he was to look for his lost bride,
gathered all his workmen and labourers and proceeded to demolish
nockma. Every day they almost dug it up, but every night the breach was
found to have been repaired by fairy workmen of Finvarras. This went on
for three days, when the Irish lord thought of the wellknown device of
sanctifying the work of excavation by sprinkling the turnedup earth
with salt. eedless to say, it succeeded. Finvarra gave back the bride,
still in the trance into which he had thrown her and the deep cut into
the fairy hill still remains to furnish proof to the incredulous.

Finvarra does not always appear, however, in such unfriendly guise. e
was popularly reputed to have under his special care the family of the
irwans of astle acket, on the northern slope of nockma. wing to his
benevolent influence, the castle cellars never went dry, nor did the
uality of the wine deteriorate. esides the winecellar, Finvarra
looked after the stables, and it was owing to the exercise that he and
his fairy followers gave the horses by night that r. ohn irwans
racers were so often successful on the urragh. That such stories could
have passed current as fact, which they undoubtedly did, is excellent
proof of how late and how completely a mythology may survive among the
uncultured.

Finvarra rules today over a wide realm of fairy folk. any of these,
again, have their own vassal chieftains, forming a tribal hierarchy such
as must have existed in the eltic days of Ireland. Finvarra and nagh
are high king and ueen, but, under them, liodna is tributary
ueen of unster, and rules from a sdh near allow in ounty ork,
while, under her again, are Aoibhinn, ueen of the fairies of orth
unster, and Ain, ueen of the fairies of outh unster. These names
form but a single instance. A map of fairy Ireland could without much
difficulty be drawn, showing, with almost political exactness, the
various kingdoms of the dhe.

Far less easy, however, would be the task of ascertaining the origin and
lineage of these fabled beings. ome of them can still be traced as
older gods and goddesses. In the eastern parts of Ireland, adb and her
sisters have become banshees who wail over deaths not necessarily
found in battle. Aynia, deemed the most powerful fairy in lster, and
Ain, ueen of outh unster, are perhaps the same person, the
mysterious and awful goddess once adored as Anu, or anu. f the two, it
is Ain who especially seems to carry on the traditions of the older
Anu, worshipped, according to the hoice of ames, in unster as a
goddess of prosperity and abundance. Within living memory, she was
propitiated by a magical ritual upon every aint ohns Eve, to ensure
fertility during the coming year. The villagers round her sdh of noc
Ain nockainy carried burning bunches of hay or straw upon poles to
the top of the hill, and thence dispersed among the fields, waving these
torches over the crops and cattle. This fairy, or goddess was held to be
friendly, and, indeed, more than friendly, to men. Whether or not she
were the mother of the gods, she is claimed as first ancestress by half
a dozen famous Irish families.

Among her children was the famous Earl erald, offspring of her alliance
with the fourth Earl of esmond, known as The agician. As in the
wellknown story of the wanmaidens, the magicianearl is said to have
stolen Ains cloak while she was bathing, and refused to return it
unless she became his bride. ut, in the end, he lost her. Ain had
warned her husband never to show surprise at anything done by their son
but a wonderful feat which he performed made the earl break this
condition, and Ain was obliged, by fairy law, to leave him. ut, though
she had lost her husband, she was not separated from her son, who was
received into the fairy world after his death, and now lives under the
surface of Lough ur, in ounty Limerick, waiting, like the ritish
Arthur, for the hour to strike in which he shall lead forth his warriors
to drive the foreigners from Ireland. ut this will not be until, by
riding round the lake once in every seventh year, he shall have worn his
horses silver shoes as thin as a cats ear.

ot only the tribe of anu, but heroes of the other mythical cycles
swell the fairy host today. onn, son of il, who was drowned before
ever he set foot on Irish soil, lives at onns ouse, a line of
sandhills in the ingle Peninsula of erry, and, as late as the
eighteenth century, we find him invoked by a local poet, half in est,
no doubt, but still, perhaps also a little in earnest. The heroes
of lster have no part in fairyland but their enemy, edb, is credited
with ueenly rule among the dhe, and is held by some to have been the
original of ueen ab. aoilt, last of the Fenians, was, in spite of
his leanings towards hristianity, enrolled among the Tuatha  anann,
but none of his kin are known there, neither ssian, nor scar, nor even
Finn himself. Yet not even to merely historical mortals are the gates of
the gods necessarily closed. The arry, chief of the barony of
arrymore, is said to inhabit an enchanted palace in nockthierna, one
of the agles ills. The not less traditionally famous onaghue, whose
domain was near illarney, now dwells beneath the waters of that lake,
and may still be seen, it is said, upon ay ay.

ut besides these figures, which can be traced in mythology or history,
and others who, though all written record of them has perished, are
obviously of the same character, there are numerous beings who suggest a
different origin from that of the Aryanseeming fairies. They correspond
to the elves and trolls of candinavian, or the silenoi and satyrs of
reek myth. uch is the Leprechaun, who makes shoes for the fairies, and
knows where hidden treasures are the an eanach, or lovetalker, who
fills the ears of idle girls with pleasant fancies when, to merely
mortal ideas, they should be busy with their work the Pooka, who leads
travellers astray, or, taking the shape of an ass or mule, beguiles them
to mount upon his back to their discomfiture the ulachan, who rides
without a head and other friendly or malicious sprites. Whence come
they A possible answer suggests itself. Preceding the Aryans, and
surviving the Aryan conuest all over Europe, was a large nonAryan
population, which must have had its own gods, who would retain their
worship, be revered by successive generations, and remain rooted to the
soil. ay not these uncouth and halfdeveloped Irish Leprechauns,
Pookas, and ulachans, together with the cotch luricanes, rownies,
and their kin, be no creations of popular fancy, but the dwindling
figures of those darker gods of the dark Iberians



Footnote 

  The story, contained in the ook of the un ow, is called The
  Phantom hariot. It has been translated by r. eirne rowe, and is
  included in iss ulls uchulinn aga.

Footnote 

  ee Elton, rigins of English istory, pp. .

Footnote 

  aius ulius olinus, known as Polyhistor, chap. I.

Footnote 

  It is appended to his translation of the tale of the Exile of the
  hildren of snach in Atlantis, ol. III.

Footnote 

  ee usacks istory of Ireland, pp. .

Footnote 

  I.e. from eaven.

Footnote 

  Thomas Arcy ee Poems, p. , The obhan aer.

Footnote 

  Larminie West Irish FolkTales, pp. .

Footnote 

  Pronounced Ildna.

Footnote 

  It is told in hyss ibbert Lectures, pp. .

Footnote 

  For still other folktale versions of this same myth see urtins
  ero Tales of Ireland.

Footnote 

  A onegal story, collected by r. avid Fitzgerald and published in
  the evue eltiue, ol. I, p. .

Footnote 

  The paper is called eaagic and unning Water.

Footnote 

  oore Folklore of the Isle of an.

Footnote 

  ee an article in the ublin niversity agazine for une, 

Footnote 

  The story is among those told by Lady Wilde in her Ancient Legends of
  Ireland, ol. I, pp. .

Footnote 

  ublin niversity agazine, une, .

Footnote 

  Pronounced leena.

Footnote 

  Pronounced Evin.

Footnote 

  ee Fitzgerald, Popular Tales of Ireland, in ol. I of the evue
  eltiue.

Footnote 

  ublin niversity agazine, une, .

Footnote 

  For stories of these two ormanIrish heroes, see rofton rokers
  Fairy Legends and Traditions of the outh of Ireland.






                       TE ITI  A TEI
                                TIE






                              APTE I

                        TE  F TE IT


The descriptions and the stories of the ritish gods have hardly come
down to us in so ample or so compact a form as those of the deities of
the aels, as they are preserved in the Irish and cottish manuscripts.
They have also suffered far more from the sophistications of the
euhemerist. nly in the Four ranches of the abinogi do the gods of
the ritons appear in anything like their real character of supernatural
beings, masters of magic, and untrammelled by the limitations which
hedge in mortals. Apart from those four fragments of mythology, and from
a very few scattered references in the early Welsh poems, one must
search for them under strange disguises. ome masuerade as kings in
eoffrey of onmouths more than apocryphal istoria ritonum. thers
have received an undeserved canonization, which must be stripped from
them before they can be seen in their true colours. thers, again, were
adopted by the ormanFrench romancers, and turned into the champions of
chivalry now known as Arthurs nights of the ound Table. ut, however
disguised, their real nature can still be discerned. The aels and the
ritons were but two branches of one racethe eltic. In many of the
gods of the ritons we shall recognize, with names alike and attributes
the same, the familiar features of the aelic Tuatha  anann.

The ritish gods are sometimes described as divided into three
familiesthe hildren of n, the hildren of udd, and the
hildren of Llyr. ut these three families are really only two for
udd, or Lludd, as he is variously called, is himself described as a son
of eli, who was the husband of the goddess n. There can be no doubt
that n herself is the same divine personage as anu, the mother of the
Tuatha  anann, and that eli is the ritish euivalent of the aelic
il, the universal is Pater who sent out the first aels from ades to
take possession of Ireland. With the other family, the hildren of
Llyr, we are eually on familiar ground for the ritish Llyr can be
none other than the aelic seagod Lr. These two families or tribes are
usually regarded as in opposition, and their struggles seem to symbolize
in ritish myth that same conflict between the powers of heaven, light,
and life and of the sea, darkness, and death which are shadowed in
aelic mythology in the battles between the Tuatha  anann and the
Fomors.

For the children of n were certainly gods of the sky. Their names are
writ large in heaven. The glittering W which we call assiopeias
hair was to our ritish ancestors Llys n, or ns ourt our
orthern rown was aer Arianrod, the astle of Arianrod, ns
daughter while the ilky Way was the astle of wydion, ns
son. ore than this, the greatest of her children, the udd or
Lludd whom some make the head of a dynasty of his own, was the eus
alike of the ritons and of the aels. is epithet of Llaw Ereint,
that is, of the and of ilver, proves him the same personage as uada
the ilveranded. The legend which must have existed to explain this
peculiarity has been lost on ritish ground, but it was doubtless the
same as that told of the Irish god. With it, and, no doubt, much else,
has disappeared any direct account of battles fought by him as skygod
against Fomorlike enemies. ut, under the faint disguise of a king of
ritain, an ancient Welsh tale records how he put an end to three
supernatural plagues which oppressed his country. In addition to this,
we find him under his name of udd described in a Welsh Triad as one of
the three generous heroes of the Isle of ritain, while another makes
him the owner of twentyone thousand milch cowsan expression which
must, to the primitive mind, have implied inexhaustible wealth. oth
help us to the conception of a god of heaven and battle, triumphant, and
therefore rich and liberal.

ore tangible evidence is, however, not lacking to prove the widespread
nature of his worship. A temple dedicated to him in oman times under
the name of odens, or udens, has been discovered at Lydney, on the
banks of the evern. The god is pictured on a plaue of bronze as a
youthful deity, haloed like the sun, and driving a fourhorsed chariot.
Flying spirits, typifying the winds, accompany him while his power over
the sea is symbolized by attendant Tritons. This was in the west of
ritain, while, in the east, there is good reason to believe that he had
a shrine overlooking the Thames. Tradition declares that t. Pauls
athedral occupies the site of an ancient pagan temple while the spot
on which it stands was called, we know from eoffrey of onmouth, Parth
Lludd by the ritons, and Ludes eat by the axons.

reat, however, as he probably was, Lludd, or udd occupies less space
in Welsh story, as we have it now, than his son. wyn ap udd has
outlived in tradition almost all his supernatural kin. Professor hys is
tempted to see in him the ritish euivalent of the aelic Finn mac
umhail. The name of both alike means white both are sons of the
heavengod both are famed as hunters. wyn, however, is more than that
for his game is man. In the early Welsh poems, he is a god of battle and
of the dead, and, as such, fills the part of a psychopompos,
conducting the slain into ades, and there ruling over them. In later,
semihristianized story he is described as wyn, son of udd, whom od
has placed over the brood of devils in Annwn, lest they should destroy
the present race. Later again, as paganism still further
degenerated, he came to be considered as king of the Tylwyth Teg, the
Welsh fairies, and his name as such has hardly yet died out of his
last haunt, the romantic vale of eath. e is the wild huntsman of Wales
and the West of England, and it is his pack which is sometimes heard at
chase in waste places by night.

In his earliest guise, as a god of war and death, he is the subect of a
poem in dialogue contained in the lack ook of aermarthen.
bscure, like most of the ancient Welsh poems, it is yet a spirited
production, and may be uoted here as a favourable specimen of the
poetry of the early ymri. In it we shall see mirrored perhaps the
clearest figure of the ritish Pantheon, the mighty hunter, not of
deer, but of mens souls, riding his demon horse, and cheering on his
demon hound to the fearful chase. e knows when and where all the great
warriors fell, for he gathered their souls upon the field of battle, and
now rules over them in ades, or upon some misty mountaintop. It
describes a mythical prince, named wyddneu aranhir, known to Welsh
legend as the ruler of a lost country now covered by the waters of
ardigan ay, asking protection of the god, who accords it, and then
relates the story of his exploits

                    wyddneu.

    A bull of conflict was he, active in dispersing an arrayed army,
    The ruler of hosts, indisposed to anger,
    lameless and pure his conduct in protecting life.

                      wyn.

    Against a hero stout was his advance,
    The ruler of hosts, disposer of wrath,
    There will be protection for thee since thou askest it.

                    wyddneu.

    For thou hast given me protection
    ow warmly wert thou welcomed
    The hero of hosts, from what region thou comest

                      wyn.

    I come from battle and conflict
    With a shield in my hand
    roken is the helmet by the pushing of spears.

                    wyddneu.

    I will address thee, exalted man,
    With his shield in distress.
    rave man, what is thy descent

                      wyn.

    oundhoofed is my horse, the torment of battle,
    Fairy am I called, wyn the son of udd,
    The lover of reurdilad, the daughter of Lludd.

                    wyddneu.

    ince it is thou, wyn, an upright man,
    From thee there is no concealing
    I am wyddneu aranhir.

                      wyn.

    asten to my ridge, the Taw abode
    ot the nearest Taw name I to thee,
    ut that Taw which is the farthest.

    Polished is my ring, golden my saddle and bright
    To my sadness
    I saw a conflict before aer andwy.

    efore aer andwy a host I saw,
    hields were shattered and ribs broken
    enowned and splendid was he who made the assault.

                    wyddneu.

    wyn, son of udd, the hope of armies,
    uicker would legions fall before the hoofs
    f thy horse than broken rushes to the ground.

                      wyn.

    andsome my dog, and roundbodied,
    And truly the best of dogs
    ormarth was he, which belonged to aelgwyn.

                    wyddneu.

    ormarth with the ruddy nose what a gazer
    Thou art upon me because I notice
    Thy wanderings on wibir ynyd.

                      wyn.

    I have been in the place where was killed wendoleu,
    The son of eidaw, the pillar of songs,
    When the ravens screamed over blood.

    I have been in the place where rn was killed,
    The son of Iweridd, of far extending fame,
    When the ravens of the battlefield screamed.

    I have been where Llacheu was slain,
    The son of Arthur, extolled in songs,
    When the ravens screamed over blood.

    I have been where eurig was killed,
    The son of arreian, of honourable fame,
    When the ravens screamed over flesh.

    I have been where wallawg was killed,
    The son of oholeth, the accomplished,
    The resister of Lloegyr, the son of Lleynawg.

    I have been where the soldiers of ritain were slain,
    From the east to the north
    I am the escort of the grave.

    I have been where the soldiers of ritain were slain,
    From the east to the south
    I am alive, they in death

A line in this poem allows us to see wyn in another and less sinister
rle. The lover of reurdilad, the daughter of Lludd, he calls
himself and an episode in the mythical romance of ulhwch and lwen,
preserved in the ed ook of ergest, gives the details of his
courtship. wyn had as rival a deity called wyrthur ap reidawl, that
is ictor, son of corcher. These two waged perpetual war for
reurdilad, or reudylad, each in turn stealing her from the other,
until the matter was referred to Arthur, who decided that reudylad
should be sent back to her father, and that wyn and wyrthur should
fight for her every first of ay, from henceforth until the day of doom,
and that whichever of them should then be conueror should have the
maiden. What satisfaction this would be to the survivor of what might
be somewhat flippantly described as, in two senses, the longest
engagement on record, is not very clear but its mythological
interpretation appears fairly obvious. In wyn, god of death and the
underworld, and in the solar deity, wyrthur, we may see the powers of
darkness and sunshine, of winter and summer, in contest, each
alternately winning and losing a bride who would seem to represent the
spring with its grain and flowers. reudylad, whom the story of ulhwch
and lwen calls the most splendid maiden in the three islands of the
mighty and in the three islands adacent, is, in fact, the ritish
Persephon. As the daughter of Lludd, she is child of the shining sky.
ut a different tradition must have made her a daughter of Llyr, the
seagod for her name as such passed, through eoffrey of onmouth, to
hakespeare, in whose hands she became that pathetic figure, ordelia in
ing Lear. It may not be altogether unworthy of notice, though perhaps
it is only a coincidence, that in some myths the reek Persephon is
made a daughter of eus and in others of Poseidon.

Turning from the skygod and his son, we find others of ns children
to have been the exponents of those arts of life which early races held
to have been taught directly by the gods to men. n herself had a
brother, th, son of a mysterious thonwy, and recognizable as a
benevolent ruler of the underworld akin to eli, or perhaps that god
himself under another title, for the name th, which means coin,
money, treasure, recalls that of Plouton, the reek god of ades,
in his guise of possessor and giver of metals. It was a belief common to
the Aryan races that wisdom, as well as wealth, came originally from the
underworld and we find th represented, in the abinogi bearing his
name, as handing on his magical lore to his nephew and pupil wydion,
who, there is good reason to believe, was the same divine personage whom
the Teutonic tribes worshipped as Woden and din. Thus euipped,
wydion son of n became the druid of the gods, the master of illusion
and phantasy, and, not only that, but the teacher of all that is useful
and good, the friend and helper of mankind, and the perpetual fighter
against niggardly underworld powers for the good gifts which they
refused to allow out of their keeping. houlder to shoulder with him in
this holy war of culture against ignorance, and light against
darkness, stood his brothers Amaethon, god of agriculture, and ovannan,
a god of smithcraft identical with the aelic iobniu. e had also a
sister called Arianrod, or ilver ircle, who, as is common in
mythologies, was not only his sister, but also his wife. o eus wedded
er and, indeed, it is difficult to say where otherwise the partners
of gods are to come from. f this connection two sons were born at one
birthylan and Lleu, who are considered as representing the twin powers
of darkness and light. With darkness the sea was inseparably connected
by the elts, and, as soon as the dark twin was born and named, he
plunged headlong into his native element. And immediately when he was
in the sea, says the abinogi of th, son of thonwy, he took its
nature, and swam as well as the best fish that was therein. And for that
reason was he called ylan, the on of the Wave. eneath him no wave
ever broke. e was killed with a spear at last by his uncle, ovannan,
and, according to the bard Taliesin, the waves of ritain, Ireland,
cotland, and the Isle of an wept for him. eautiful legends grew
up around his death. The clamour of the waves dashing upon the beach is
the expression of their longing to avenge their son. The sound of the
sea rushing up the mouth of the iver onway is still known as ylans
deathgroan. A small promontory on the arnarvonshire side of the
enai traits, called Pwynt aen Tylen, or Pwynt aen ulan,
preserves his name.

The other child of wydion and Arianrod grew up to become the ritish
sungod, Lleu Llaw yffes, the exact counterpart of the aelic Lugh
Lamhfada, Light the Longhanded. Like all solar deities, his growth
was rapid. When he was a year old, he seemed to be two years at the age
of two, he travelled by himself and when he was four years old, he was
as tall as a boy of eight, and was his fathers constant companion.

ne day, wydion took him to the castle of Arianrodnot her castle in
the sky, but her abode on earth, the stillremembered site of which is
marked by a patch of rocks in the enai traits, accessible without a
boat only during the lowest spring and autumn tides. Arianrod had
disowned her son, and did not recognize him when she saw him with
wydion. he asked who he was, and was much displeased when told. he
demanded to know his name, and, when wydion replied that he had as yet
received none, she laid a destiny upon him, after the fashion of the
elts, that he should be without a name until she chose to bestow one on
him herself.

To be without a name was a very serious thing to the ancient ritons,
who seem to have held the primitive theory that the name and the soul
are the same. o wydion cast about to think by what craft he might
extort from Arianrod some remark from which he could name their son. The
next day, he went down to the seashore with the boy, both of them
disguised as cordwainers. e made a boat out of seaweed by magic, and
some beautifullycoloured leather out of some dry sticks and sedges.
Then they sailed the boat to the port of Arianrods castle, and,
anchoring it where it could be seen, began ostentatiously to stitch away
at the leather. aturally, they were soon noticed, and Arianrod sent
someone out to see who they were and what they were doing. When she
found that they were shoemakers, she remembered that she wanted some
shoes. wydion, though he had her measure, purposely made them, first
too large, and then too small. This brought Arianrod herself down to the
boat to be fitted.

While wydion was measuring Arianrods foot for the shoes, a wren came
and stood upon the deck. The boy took his bow and arrow, and hit the
wren in the lega favourite shot of eltic crack archers, at any rate
in romance. The goddess was pleased to be amiable and complimentary.
Truly, said she, the lion aimed at it with a steady hand. It is from
such incidents that primitive people take their names, all the world
over. The boy had got his. It is no thanks to you, said wydion to
Arianrod, but now he has a name. And a good name it is. e shall be
called Llew Llaw yffes.

This name of the sungod is a good example of how obsolete the ancient
pagan tradition had become before it was put into writing. The old word
Lleu, meaning light, had passed out of use, and the scribe
substituted for a name that was unintelligible to him one like it which
he knew, namely Llew, meaning lion. The word yffes seems also to
have suffered change, and to have meant originally not steady, but
long.

At any rate, Arianrod was defeated in her design to keep her son
nameless. either did she even get her shoes for, as soon as he had
gained his obect, wydion allowed the boat to change back into
seaweed, and the leather to return to sedge and sticks. o, in her
anger, she put a fresh destiny on the boy, that he should not take arms
till she herself gave them him.

wydion, however, took Lleu to inas inllev, his castle, which still
stands at the edge of the enai traits, and brought him up as a
warrior. As soon as he thought him old enough to have arms, he took him
with him again to aer Arianrod. This time, they were disguised as
bards. Arianrod received them gladly, heard wydions songs and tales,
feasted them, and prepared a room for them to sleep in.

The next morning, wydion got up very early, and prepared his most
powerful incantations. y his druidical arts he made it seem as if the
whole country rang with the shouts and trumpets of an army, and he put a
glamour over everyone, so that they saw the bay filled with ships.
Arianrod came to him in terror, asking what could be done to protect the
castle. ive us arms, he replied, and we will do the best we can. o
Arianrods maidens armed wydion, while Arianrod herself put arms on
Lleu. y the time she had finished, all the noises had ceased, and the
ships had vanished. Let us take our arms off again, said wydion we
shall not need them now. ut the army is all round the castle cried
Arianrod. There was no army, answered wydion it was only an
illusion of mine to cause you to break your prophecy and give our son
arms. And now he has got them, without thanks to you. Then I will lay
a worse destiny on him, cried the infuriated goddess. e shall never
have a wife of the people of this earth. e shall have a wife in spite
of you, said wydion.

o wydion went to th, his uncle and tutor in magic, and between them
they made a woman out of flowers by charms and illusion. They took the
blossoms of the oak, and the blossoms of the broom, and the blossoms of
the meadowsweet, and produced from them a maiden, the fairest and most
graceful that man ever saw. They called her lodeuwedd Flowerface,
and gave her to Lleu as his wife. And they gave Lleu a palace called ur
y astell, near ala Lake.

All went well until, one day, ronw Pebyr, one of the gods of darkness,
came by, hunting, and killed the stag at nightfall near Lleus castle.
The sungod was away upon a visit to th, but lodeuwedd asked the
stranger to take shelter with her. That night they fell in love with one
another, and conspired together how Lleu might be put away. When Lleu
came back from ths court, lodeuwedd, like a eltic alilah, wormed
out of him the secret of how his life was preserved. e told her that he
could only die in one way he could not be killed either inside or
outside a house, either on horseback or on foot, but that if a spear
that had been a year in the making, and which was never worked upon
except during the sacrifice on unday, were to be cast at him as he
stood beneath a roof of thatch, after having ust bathed, with one foot
upon the edge of the bath and the other upon a buck goats back, it
would cause his death. lodeuwedd piously thanked eaven that he was so
well protected, and sent a messenger to her paramour, telling him what
she had learned. ronw set to work on the spear and in a year it was
ready. When she knew this, lodeuwedd asked Lleu to show her exactly how
it was he could be killed.

Lleu agreed and lodeuwedd prepared the bath under the thatched roof,
and tethered the goat by it. Lleu bathed, and then stood with one foot
upon the edge of the bath, and the other upon the goats back. At this
moment, ronw, from an ambush, flung the spear, and hit Lleu, who, with
a terrible cry, changed into an eagle, and flew away. e never came
back and ronw took possession of both his wife and his palace.

ut wydion set out to search everywhere for his son. At last, one day,
he came to a house in orth Wales where the man was in great anxiety
about his sow for as soon as the sty was opened, every morning, she
rushed out, and did not return again till late in the evening. wydion
offered to follow her, and, at dawn, the man took him to the sty, and
opened the door. The sow leaped forth, and ran, and wydion ran after
her. e tracked her to a brook between nowdon and the sea, still called
ant y Llew, and saw her feeding underneath an oak. pon the top of the
tree there was an eagle, and, every time it shook itself, there fell off
it lumps of putrid meat, which the sow ate greedily. wydion suspected
that the eagle must be Lleu. o he sang this verse

  ak that grows between the two banks
   arkened is the sky and hill
   hall I not tell him by his wounds,
   That this is Lleu

The eagle, on hearing this, came halfway down the tree. o wydion
sang

  ak that grows in upland ground,
   Is it not wetted by the rain as it not been drenched
   y nine score tempests
   It bears in its branches Lleu Llaw yffes.

The eagle came slowly down until it was on the lowest branch. wydion
sang

  ak that grows beneath the steep
   tately and maestic is its aspect
   hall I not speak it
   That Lleu will come to my lap

Then the eagle came down, and sat on wydions knee. wydion struck it
with his magic wand, and it became Lleu again, wasted to skin and bone
by the poison on the spear.

wydion took him to th to be healed, and left him there, while he went
to ur y astell, where lodeuwedd was. When she heard that he was
coming, she fled. ut wydion overtook her, and changed her into an owl,
the bird that hates the day. A still older form of this probably
extremely ancient myth of the sungodthe savage and repulsive details
of which speak of a hoary antiuitymakes the chase of lodeuwedd by
wydion to have taken place in the sky, the stars scattered over the
ilky Way being the traces of it. As for her accomplice, Lleu would
accept no satisfaction short of ronws submitting to stand exactly
where Lleu had stood, to be shot at in his turn. To this he was obliged
to agree and Lleu killed him.

There are two other sons of eli and n of whom so little is recorded
that it would hardly be worth while mentioning them, were it not for the
wild poetry of the legend connected with them. The tale, put into
writing at a time when all the gods were being transfigured into simple
mortals, tells us that they were two kings of ritain, brothers. ne
starlight night they were walking together. ee, said ynniaw to
Peibaw, what a fine, widespreading field I have. Where is it asked
Peibaw. There, replied ynniaw the whole stretch of the sky, as far
as the eye reaches. Look then, returned Peibaw, what a number of
cattle I have grazing on your field. Where are they asked ynniaw.
All the stars that you can see, replied Peibaw, every one of them of
fierycoloured gold, with the moon for a shepherd over them. They
shall not feed on my field, cried ynniaw. They shall, exclaimed
Peibaw. They shall not, cried ynniaw, They shall, said Peibaw.
They shall not, ynniaw answered and so they went on, from
contradiction to uarrel, and from private uarrel to civil war, until
the armies of both of them were destroyed, and the two authors of the
evil were turned by od into oxen for their sins.

Last of the children of n, we find a goddess called Penardun, of whom
little is known except that she was married to the seagod Llyr. This
incident is curious, as forming a parallel to the aelic story which
tells of intermarriage between the Tuatha  anann and the Fomors.
rigit, the agdas daughter, was married to ress, son of Elathan,
while ian, the son of iancecht, wedded Ethniu, the daughter of alor.
o, in this kindred mythology, a slender tie of relationship binds the
gods of the sky to the gods of the sea.

The name Llyr is supposed, like its Irish euivalent Lr, to have
meant the ea. The ritish seagod is undoubtedly the same as the
aelic indeed, the two facts that he is described in Welsh literature
as Llyr Llediath, that is, Llyr of the Foreign ialect, and is given a
wife called Iweridd Ireland, suggest that he may have been
borrowed by the ritons from the aels later than any mythology common
to both. As a ritish god, he was the faroff original of hakespeares
ing Lear. The chief city of his worship is still called after him,
Leicester, that is, Llyrcestre, in still earlier days, aer Llyr.

Llyr, we have noticed, married two wives, Penardun and Iweridd. y the
daughter of n he had a son called anawyddan, who is identical with
the aelic anannn mac Lir. We know less of his character and
attributes than we do of the Irish god but we find him eually a ruler
in that ades or Elysium which the eltic mind ever connected with the
sea. Like all the inhabitants of that other world, he is at once a
master of magic and of the useful arts, which he taught willingly to his
friends. To his enemies, however, he could show a different side of his
character. A triad tells us that

  The achievement of anawyddan the Wise,
   After lamentation and fiery wrath,
   Was the constructing of the bonefortress of eth and Anoeth,

which is described as a prison made, in the shape of a beehive,
entirely of human bones mortared together, and divided into innumerable
cells, forming a kind of labyrinth. In this ghastly place he immured
those whom he found trespassing in ades and among his captives was no
less a person than the famous Arthur.

Ireland bore two children to Llyr a daughter called ranwen and a son
called rn. The little we know of ranwen of the Fair osom shows her
as a goddess of lovechild, like the reek Aphrodit, of the sea. rn,
on the other hand, is, even more clearly than anawyddan, a dark deity
of ades. e is represented as of colossal size, so huge, in fact, that
no house or ship was big enough to hold him. e delighted in battle
and carnage, like the hoodiecrow or raven from which he probably took
his name, but he was also the especial patron of bards, minstrels,
and musicians, and we find him in one of the poems ascribed to Taliesin
claiming to be himself a bard, a harper, a player on the crowth, and
sevenscore other musicians all at once. is son was called
aradawc the trongarmed, who, as the ritish mythology crumbled,
became confounded with the historical aratacus, known popularly as
aractacus.

oth rn and anawyddan were especially connected with the wansea
peninsula. The bonefortress of eth and Anoeth was placed by tradition
in ower. That rn was eually at home there may be proved from
the orte arthur, in which storehouse of forgotten and misunderstood
mythology rn of ower survives as ing randegore.

uch identification of a mere mortal country with the other world seems
strange enough to us, but to our eltic ancestors it was a uite natural
thought. All islandsand peninsulas, which, viewed from an opposite
coast, probably seemed to them islandswere deemed to be preeminently
homes of the dark Powers of ades. ifficult of access, protected by the
turbulent and dangerous sea, sometimes rendered uite invisible by fogs
and mists and, at other times, looming up ghostlily on the horizon,
often held by the remnant of a hostile lower race, they gained a mystery
and a sanctity from the law of the human mind which has always held the
unknown to be the terrible. The ornish ritons, gazing from the shore,
saw ower and Lundy, and deemed them outposts of the oversea ther
World. To the ritons of Wales, Ireland was no human realm, a view
reciprocated by the aels, who saw ades in ritain, while the Isle of
an was a little ades common to them both. or even was the sea always
necessary to sunder the world of ghosts from that of shadowcasting
men. lastonbury Tor, surrounded by almost impassable swamps, was one
of the especial haunts of wyn ap udd. The ritons of the north held
that beyond the oman wall and the vast aledonian wood lived ghosts and
not men. Even the oman province of emetiacalled by the Welsh yfed,
and corresponding, roughly, to the modern ounty of Pembrokeshirewas,
as a last stronghold of the aborigines, identified with the mythic
underworld.

As such, yfed was ruled by a local tribe of gods, whose greatest
figures were Pwyll, ead of Annwn the Welsh name for ades, with his
wife hiannon, and their son Pryderi. These beings are described as
hostile to the children of n, but friendly to the race of Llyr. After
Pwylls death or disappearance, his widow hiannon becomes the wife of
anawyddan. In a poem of Taliesins we find anawyddan and Pryderi
ointrulers of ades, and warders of that magic cauldron of
inspiration which the gods of light attempted to steal or capture,
and which became famous afterwards as the oly rail. Another of their
treasures were the Three irds of hiannon, which, we are told in an
ancient book, could sing the dead to life and the living into the sleep
of death. Fortunately they sang seldom. There are three things, says a
Welsh triad, which are not often heard the song of the birds of
hiannon, a song of wisdom from the mouth of a axon, and an invitation
to a feast from a miser.

or is the list of ritish gods complete without mention of Arthur,
though most readers will be surprised to find him in such company. The
genius of Tennyson, who drew his materials mostly from the ormanFrench
romances, has stereotyped the popular conception of Arthur as a king of
early ritain who fought for his fatherland and the hristian faith
against invading axons. Possibly there may, indeed, have been a
powerful ritish chieftain bearing that typically eltic name, which is
found in Irish legend as Artur, one of the sons of emed who fought
against the Fomors, and on the ontinent as Artaius, a aulish deity
whom the omans identified with ercury, and who seems to have been a
patron of agriculture. ut the original Arthur stands upon the same
ground as uchulainn and Finn. is deeds are mythical, because
superhuman. is companions can be shown to have been divine. ome we
know were worshipped in aul. thers are children of n, of Llyr, and
of Pwyll, dynasties of older gods to whose head Arthur seems to have
risen, as his cult waxed and theirs waned. tripped of their godhead,
and strangely transformed, they fill the pages of romance as nights of
the Table ound.

These deities were the native gods of ritain. any others are, however,
mentioned upon inscriptions found in our island, but these were almost
all exotic and imported. Imperial ome brought men of diverse races
among her legions, and these men brought their gods. cattered over
ritain, but especially in the north, near the Wall, we find evidence
that deities of many nationsfrom ermany to Africa, and from aul to
Persiawere sporadically worshipped. ost of these foreign gods
were oman, but a temple at Eboracum now York was dedicated to
erapis, and ithras, the Persian sungod, was also adored there while
at orbridge, in orthumberland the ancient orspitium, there have
been found altars to the Tyrian ercules and to Astarte. The wargod was
also invoked under many strange namesas ocidius by a colony of
acians in umberland as Toutates, amulus, oritiacus, elatucador,
Alator, Loucetius, ondates, and igisamos by men of different
countries. A goddess of war was worshipped at ath under the name of
emetona. The hot springs of the same town were under the patronage of a
divinity called ul, identified by the omans with inerva, and she was
helped by a god of medicine described on a dedicatory tablet as ol
Apollo Anicetus. Few of these strange gods, however, seem to have
taken hold of the imagination of the native ritons. Their worshippers
did not proselytize, and their general influence was probably about
eual to that of an Evangelical hurch in a Turkish town. The sole
exceptions to this rule are where the foreign gods are aulish but in
several instances it can be proved that they were not so much of oman,
as of original eltic importation. The warlike heavengod amulus
appears in aelic heroic myth as umhal, the father of Finn, and in
ritish mythical history as oel, a duke of aer oelvin known earlier
as amulodunum, and now as olchester, who seized the crown of ritain,
and spent his short reign in a series of battles. The name of the
sungod aponos is found alike upon altars in aul and ritain, and in
Welsh literature as abon, a follower of Arthur while another aulish
sungod, elinus, who had a splendid temple at aocassos the modern
ayeux, though not mentioned in the earliest ritish mythology, as its
scattered records have come down to us, must have been connected with
rn, for we find in eoffrey of onmouths istory ing elinus as
brother of ing rennius, and in the orte arthur alin as
brother of alan. A secondcentury reek writer gives an account
of a god of elouence worshipped in aul under the name of gmios, and
represented as euipped like eracles, a description which exactly
corresponds to the conception of the aelic gma, at once patron of
literature and writing and professional strong man of the Tuatha 
anann. emetona, the wargoddess worshipped at ath, was probably the
same as emon, one of uadas alkyrwives, while a broken inscription
to athubodva, which probably stood, when intact, for athubodva, may
well have been addressed to the aulish euivalent of adb atha, the
Warfury. Lugh, or Lleu, was also widely known on the ontinent as
Lugus. Three important townsLaon, Leyden, and Lyonswere all anciently
called after him Lugudunum Lugus town, and at the last and
greatest of these a festival was still held in oman times upon the
sungods daythe first of Augustwhich corresponded to the Lugnassad
Lughs commemoration held in ancient Ireland. rigit, the aelic
inerva, is also found in ritain as rigantia, tutelary goddess of the
rigantes, a orthern tribe, and in Eastern France as rigindo, to whom
Iccavos, son of ppianos, made a dedicatory offering of which there is
still record.

ther, less striking agreements between the mythical divine names of the
Insular and ontinental elts might be cited. These recorded should,
however, prove sufficiently that aul, ael, and riton shared in a
common heritage of mythological names and ideas, which they separately
developed into three superficially different, but essentially similar
cults.



Footnote 

  Lady uests abinogion, a note to ath, the on of athonwy.

Footnote 

  The tory of Lludd and Llevelys. ee chap. IThe ecline and
  Fall of the ods.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  ee a monograph by the ight on. harles athurst oman Antiuities
  in Lydney Park, loucestershire.

Footnote 

  chap. IThe ecline and Fall of the ods.

Footnote 

  ibbert Lectures, pp. , .

Footnote 

  o translated by Lady uest. Professor hys, however, renders it, in
  whom od has put the instinct of the demons of Annwn. Arthurian
  Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  Lady uests abinogion. ote to ulhwch and lwen.

Footnote 

  lack ook of aermarthen, poem III. ol. I, p. , of kenes
  Four Ancient ooks.

Footnote 

  I have taken the liberty of omitting a few lines whose connection with
  their context is not very apparent.

Footnote 

  wyn was said to specially freuent the summits of hills.

Footnote 

  This line is Professor hyss. kene translates it Whilst I am
  called wyn the son of udd.

Footnote 

  I have here preferred hyss rendering Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  A name for ades, of unknown meaning.

Footnote 

  ormarth means eaths oor. hys Arthurian Legend, pp. .

Footnote 

  hys has it

                ormarth, rednosed, groundgrazing
                 n him we perceived the speed
                 f thy wandering on loud ount.

                              Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. . kene translates I am alive, they
  in their graves

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, pp. .

Footnote 

  yer tudies of the ods in reece, p. .

  wyn, son of udd, had a brother, Edeyrn, of whom so little has come
  down to us that he finds his most suitable place in a footnote.
  nmentioned in the earliest Welsh legends, he first appears as a
  knight of Arthurs court in the ed ook stories of ulhwch and
  lwen, the ream of honabwy, and eraint, the on of Erbin. e
  accompanied Arthur on his expedition to ome, and is said also to have
  slain three most atrocious giants at rentenol rent noll, near
  lastonbury. is name occurs in a catalogue of Welsh saints, where he
  is described as a bard, and the chapel of odedyrn, near olyhead,
  still stands to his honour. odern readers will know him from
  Tennysons Idyll of eraint and Enid, which follows very closely the
  Welsh romance of eraint, the on of Erbin.

Footnote 

  hyswho calls him a ambrian Pluto Lectures on Welsh Philology,
  p. .

Footnote 

  ook of Taliesin, LIII. The eathsong of ylan, on of the Wave,
  ol. I, p.  of kene.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  hys eltic Folklore, p. .

Footnote 

  i.e. The Lion with the teady and.

Footnote 

  ee hys ibbert Lectures, note to p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  etold from the abinogi of ath, on of athonwy, in Lady uests
  abinogion.

Footnote 

  The Iolo anuscripts collected by Edward Williams, the bard, at about
  the beginning of the nineteenth centuryThe Tale of hitta awr.

Footnote 

  ee hapter IIThe ise of the unod.

Footnote 

  hys tudies in the Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  The old Irish tract called oir Anmann the hoice of ames says
  anannan mac Lir ... the ritons and the men of Erin deemed that he
  was the god of the sea.

Footnote 

  Iolo ., stanza  of The tanzas of the Achievements, composed
  by the Azure ard of the hair.

Footnote 

  ee note to chap. IIThe Treasures of ritain.

Footnote 

  abinogi of ranwen, aughter of Llyr.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  ook of Taliesin, poem LIII, in kenes Four Ancient ooks of
  Wales, ol. I, p. .

Footnote 

  The erses of the raves of the Warriors, in the lack ook of
  aermarthen. ee also hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  hys tudies in the Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  abinogi of anawyddan, on of Llyr.

Footnote 

  ook of Taliesin, poem xiv, ol. I, p. , of kene.

Footnote 

  hys tudies in the Arthurian Legend, p.  and note.

Footnote 

  ee a paper in the Edinburgh eview for uly, The omans in
  ritain.

Footnote 

  It is said that the ld ing ole of the popular ballad, who was a
  merry old soul, represents the last faint tradition of the eltic
  god.

Footnote 

  eoffrey of onmouth, ook III, chap. I.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  For full account of aulish gods, and their aelic and ritish
  affinities, see hys ibbert Lectures, I and IIThe aulish
  Pantheon.






                              APTE II

                  TE AETE F TE  F AE


It is with the family of Pwyll, deities connected with the southwest
corner of Wales, called by the omans emetia, and by the ritons yfed,
and, roughly speaking, identical with the modern county of
Pembrokeshire, that the earliest consecutive accounts of the ritish
gods begin. The first of the Four ranches of the abinogi tell us how
Pwyll, Prince of yfed, gained the right to be called Pen Annwn, the
ead of ades. Indeed, it almost seems as if it had been deliberately
written to explain how the same person could be at once a mere mortal
prince, however legendary, and a ruler in the mystic ther World, and so
to reconcile two conflicting traditions. ut to an earlier age than
that in which the legend was put into a literary shape, such forced
reconciliation would not have been needed for the two legends would not
have been considered to conflict. When Pwyll, head of Annwn, was a
mythic person whose tradition was still alive, the unexplored, rugged,
and savage country of yfed, populated by the aboriginal Iberians whom
the elt had driven into such remote districts, appeared to those who
dwelt upon the eastern side of its dividing river, the Taw, at least a
dependency of Annwn, if not that weird realm itself. ut, as men grew
bolder, the frontier was crossed, and yfed entered and traversed, and
found to be not so unlike other countries. Its inhabitants, if not of
eltic race, were yet of flesh and blood. o that, though the province
still continued to bear to a late date the names of the Land of
Illusion and the ealm of lamour, it was no longer deemed to be
ades itself. That fitful and shadowy country had folded its tents, and
departed over or under seas.

The story of Pwyll, Prince of yfed, tells us how there was war
in Annwn between its two kingsor between two, perhaps, of its many
chieftains. Arawn ilverTongue and avgan ummerWhite each
coveted the dominions of the other. In the continual contests between
them, Arawn was worsted, and in despair he visited the upper earth to
seek for a mortal ally.

At this time Pwyll, Prince of yfed, held his court at arberth. e had,
however, left his capital upon a hunting expedition to lyn ch, known
today as a valley upon the borders of the two counties of Pembroke and
armarthen. Like so many kings of European and riental romance, when an
adventure is at hand, he became separated from his party, and was, in
modern parlance, thrown out. e could, however, still hear the music
of his hounds, and was listening to them, when he also distinguished the
cry of another pack coming towards him. As he watched and listened, a
stag came into view and the strange hounds pulled it down almost at his
feet. At first Pwyll hardly looked at the stag, he was so taken up with
gazing at the hounds, for of all the hounds that he had seen in the
world, he had never seen any that were like unto these. For their hair
was of a brilliant shining white, and their ears were red and as the
whiteness of their bodies shone, so did the redness of their ears
glisten. They were, indeed, though Pwyll does not seem to have known
it, of the true ades breedthe snowwhite, redeared hounds we meet in
aelic legends, and which are still said to be sometimes heard and seen
scouring the hills of Wales by night. eeing no rider with the hounds,
Pwyll drove them away from the dead stag, and called up his own pack to
it.

While he was doing this, a man upon a large, lightgray steed, with a
huntinghorn round his neck, and clad in garments of gray woollen in the
fashion of a hunting garb appeared, and rated Pwyll for his
unsportsmanlike conduct. reater discourtesy, said he, I never saw
than your driving away my dogs after they had killed the stag, and
calling your own to it. And though I may not be revenged upon you for
this, I swear that I will do you more damage than the value of a hundred
stags.

Pwyll expressed his contrition, and, asking the newcomers name and
rank, offered to atone for his fault. The stranger told his nameArawn,
a king of Annwnand said that Pwyll could gain his forgiveness only in
one way, by going to Annwn instead of him, and fighting for him with
avgan. Pwyll agreed to do this, and the ing of ades put his own
semblance upon the mortal prince, so that not a person in Annwnnot even
Arawns own wifewould know that he was not that king. e led him by a
secret path into Annwn, and left him before his castle, charging him to
return to the place where they had first met, at the end of a year from
that day. n the other hand, Arawn took on Pwylls shape, and went to
arberth.

o one in Annwn suspected Pwyll of being anyone else than their king. e
spent the year in ruling the realm, in hunting, minstrelsy, and
feasting. oth by day and night, he had the company of Arawns wife, the
most beautiful woman he had ever yet seen, but he refrained from taking
advantage of the trust placed in him. At last the day came when he was
to meet avgan in single combat. ne blow settled it for Pwyll,
avgans destined conueror, thrust his antagonist an arms and a
spears length over the crupper of his horse, breaking his shield and
armour, and mortally wounding him. avgan was carried away to die, and
Pwyll, in the guise of Arawn, received the submission of the dead kings
subects, and annexed his realm. Then he went back to lyn ch, to keep
his tryst with Arawn.

They retook their own shapes, and each returned to his own kingdom.
Pwyll learned that yfed had never been ruled so well, or been so
prosperous, as during the year ust passed. As for the ing of ades, he
found his enemy gone, and his domains extended. And when he caressed his
wife, she asked him why he did so now, after the lapse of a whole year.
o he told her the truth, and they both agreed that they had indeed got
a true friend in Pwyll.

After this, the kings of Annwn and yfed made their friendship strong
between them. From that time forward, says the story, Pwyll was no
longer called Prince of yfed, but Pen Annwn, the ead of ades.

The second mythological incident in the abinogi of Pwyll, Prince of
yfed, tells how the ead of ades won his wife, hiannon, thought by
Professor hys to have been a goddess either of the dawn or of the
moon. There was a mound outside Pwylls palace at arberth which
had a magical uality. To anyone who sat upon it there happened one of
two things either he received wounds and blows, or else he saw a
wonder. ne day, it occurred to Pwyll that he would like to try the
experience of the mound. o he went and sat upon it.

o unseen blows assailed Pwyll, but he had not been sitting long upon
the mound before he saw, coming towards him, a lady on a purewhite
horse of large size, with a garment of shining gold around her, riding
very uietly. e sent a man on foot to ask her who she was, but, though
she seemed to be moving so slowly, the man could not come up to her. e
failed utterly to overtake her, and she passed on out of sight.

The next day, Pwyll went again to the mound. The lady appeared, and,
this time, Pwyll sent a horseman. At first, the horseman only ambled
along at about the same pace at which the lady seemed to be going then,
failing to get near her, he urged his horse into a gallop. ut, whether
he rode slow or fast, he could come no closer to the lady than before,
although she seemed to the eyes of those who watched to have been going
only at a foots pace.

The day after that, Pwyll determined to accost the lady himself. he
came at the same gentle walk, and Pwyll at first rode easily, and then
at his horses topmost speed, but with the same result, or lack of it.
At last, in despair, he called to the mysterious damsel to stop. I will
stop gladly, said she, and it would have been better for your horse if
you had asked me before. he told him that her name was hiannon,
daughter of eveydd the Ancient. The nobles of her realm had determined
to give her in marriage against her will, so she had come to seek out
Pwyll, who was the man of her choice. Pwyll was delighted to hear this,
for he thought that she was the most beautiful lady he had ever seen.
efore they parted, they had plighted troth, and Pwyll had promised to
appear on that day twelvemonth at the palace of her father, eveydd.
Then she vanished, and Pwyll returned to arberth.

At the appointed time, Pwyll went to visit eveydd the Ancient, with a
hundred followers. e was received with much welcome, and the
disposition of the feast put under his command, as the elts seem to
have done to especially honoured guests. As they sat at meat, with Pwyll
between hiannon and her father, a tall auburnhaired youth came into
the hall, greeted Pwyll, and asked a boon of him. Whatever boon you may
ask of me, said Pwyll thoughtlessly, if it is in my power, you shall
have it. Then the suitor threw off all disguise, called the guests to
witness Pwylls promise, and claimed hiannon as his bride. Pwyll was
dumb. e silent as long as you will, said the masterful hiannon
never did a man make worse use of his wits than you have done. Lady,
replied the amazed Pwyll, I knew not who he was. e is the man to
whom they would have given me against my will, she answered, wawl,
the son of ld. You must bestow me upon him now, lest shame befall
you. ever will I do that, said Pwyll. estow me upon him, she
insisted, and I will cause that I shall never be his. o Pwyll
promised wawl that he would make a feast that day year, at which he
would resign hiannon to him.

The next year, the feast was made, and hiannon sat by the side of her
unwelcome bridegroom. ut Pwyll was waiting outside the palace, with a
hundred men in ambush. When the banuet was at its height, he came into
the hall, dressed in coarse, ragged garments, shod with clumsy old
shoes, and carrying a leather bag. ut the bag was a magic one, which
hiannon had given to her lover, with directions as to its use. Its
uality was that, however much was put into it, it could never be
filled. I crave a boon, he said to wawl. What is it wawl replied.
I am a poor man, and all I ask is to have this bag filled with meat.
wawl granted what he said was a reuest within reason, and ordered
his followers to fill the bag. ut the more they put into it, the more
room in it there seemed to be. wawl was astonished, and asked why this
was. Pwyll replied that it was a bag that could never be filled until
someone possessed of lands and riches should tread the food down with
both his feet. o this for the man, said hiannon to wawl. ladly I
will, replied he, and put both his feet into the bag. ut no sooner had
he done so than Pwyll slipped the bag over wawls head, and tied it up
at the mouth. e blew his horn, and all his followers came in. What
have you got in the bag asked each one in turn. A badger, replied
Pwyll. Then each, as he received Pwylls answer, kicked the bag, or hit
it with a stick. Then, says the story, was the game of adger in the
ag first played.

wawl, however, fared better than we suspect that the badger usually
did for eveydd the Ancient interceded for him. Pwyll willingly
released him, on condition that he promised to give up all claim to
hiannon, and renounced all proects of revenge. wawl consented, and
gave sureties, and went away to his own country to have his bruises
healed.

This country of wawls was, no doubt, the sky for he was evidently a
sungod. is name bewrays him for the meaning of wawl is
light. It was one of the hours of victory for the dark powers,
such as were celebrated in the eltic calendar by the Feast of amhain,
or ummer End.

There was no hindrance now to the marriage of Pwyll and hiannon. he
became his bride, and returned with him to yfed.

For three years, they were without an heir, and the nobles of yfed
became discontented. They petitioned Pwyll to take another wife instead
of hiannon. e asked for a years delay. This was granted, and, before
the end of the year, a son was born. ut, on the night of his birth, the
six women set to keep watch over hiannon all fell asleep at once and
when they woke up, the boy had vanished. Fearful lest their lives should
be forfeited for their neglect, they agreed to swear that hiannon had
eaten her child. They killed a litter of puppies, and smeared some of
the blood on hiannons face and hands, and put some of the bones by her
side. Then they awoke her with a great outcry, and accused her. he
swore that she knew nothing of the death of her son, but the women
persisted that they had seen her devour him, and had been unable to
prevent it. The druids of that day were not sufficiently practical
anatomists to be able to tell the bones of a child from those of a dog,
so they condemned hiannon upon the evidence of the women. ut, even
now, Pwyll would not put her away so she was assigned a penance. For
seven years, she was to sit by a horseblock outside the gate, and offer
to carry visitors into the palace upon her back. ut it rarely
happened, says the abinogi, that any would permit her to do so.

Exactly what had become of hiannons child seems to have been a mystery
even to the writer of the abinogi. It was, at any rate, in some way
connected with the eually mysterious disappearance on every night of
the first of ayeltaine, the eltic sunfestivalof the colts foaled
by a beautiful mare belonging to Teirnyon Twryv liant, one of Pwylls
vassals. Every ayday night, the mare foaled, but no one knew what
became of the colt. Teirnyon decided to find out. e caused the mare to
be taken into a house, and there he watched it, fully armed. Early in
the night, the colt was born. Then there was a great noise, and an arm
with claws came through the window, and gripped the colts mane.
Teirnyon hacked at the arm with his sword, and cut it off. Then he heard
wailing, and opened the door, and found a baby in swaddling clothes,
wrapped in a satin mantle. e took it up and brought it to his wife, and
they decided to adopt it. They called the boy wri Wallt Euryn, that is
wri of the olden air.

The older the boy grew, the more it seemed to Teirnyon that he became
like Pwyll. Then he remembered that he had found him upon the very night
that hiannon lost her child. o he consulted with his wife, and they
both agreed that the baby they had so mysteriously found must be the
same that hiannon had so mysteriously lost. And they decided that it
would not be right for them to keep the son of another, while so good a
lady as hiannon was being punished wrongfully.

o, the very next day, Teirnyon set out for arberth, taking the boy
with him. They found hiannon sitting, as usual, by the gate, but they
would not allow her to carry them into the palace on her back. Pwyll
welcomed them and that evening, as they sat at supper, Teirnyon told
his hosts the story from beginning to end. And he presented her son to
hiannon.

As soon as everyone in the palace saw the boy, they admitted that he
must be Pwylls son. o they adopted him with delight and Pendaran
yfed, the head druid of the kingdom, gave him a new name. e called him
Pryderi, meaning trouble, from the first word that his mother
had uttered when he was restored to her. For she had said Trouble
is, indeed, at an end for me, if this be true.



Footnote 

  hys tudies in the Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  It is constantly socalled by the fourteenthcentury Welsh poet,
  afydd ab wilym, so much admired by eorge orrow.

Footnote 

  This chapter is retold from Lady uests translation of the abinogi
  of Pwyll, Prince of yfed.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p.  and note. ld was probably the
  goddess of the iver lyde. ee hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  Pronounced Pridary.






                             APTE III

                     TE WI F AWE A TE
                         EEAI F 


In the second of the Four ranches, Pryderi, come to mans estate, and
married to a wife called icva, appears as a guest or vassal at the
court of a greater god of ades than himselfrn, the son of the
seagod Llyr. The children of Llyrrn, with his sister ranwen of the
Fair osom and his halfbrother anawyddan, as well as two sons of
anawyddans mother, Penardun, by an earlier marriage, were holding
court at Twr ranwen, ranwens Tower, now called arlech. As they
sat on a cliff, looking over the sea, they saw thirteen ships coming
from Ireland. The fleet sailed close under the land, and rn sent
messengers to ask who they were, and why they had come. It was replied
that they were the vessels of atholwch, ing of Ireland, and that he
had come to ask rn for his sister ranwen in marriage. rn consented,
and they fixed upon Aberffraw, in Anglesey, as the place at which to
hold the wedding feast. atholwch and his fleet went there by sea, and
rn and his host by land. When they arrived, and met, they set up
pavilions for no house could ever hold the blessed rn. And there
ranwen became the ing of Irelands bride.

These relations were not long, however, allowed to be friendly. f the
two other sons of Llyrs wife, Penardun, the mother of anawyddan, one
was called issyen, and the other, Evnissyen. issyen was a lover of
peace, and would always cause his family to be friends when their wrath
was at the highest, but Evnissyen would cause strife between his two
brothers when they were most at peace. ow Evnissyen was enraged
because his consent had not been asked to ranwens marriage. ut of
spite at this, he cut off the lips, ears, eyebrows, and tails of all
atholwchs horses.

When the ing of Ireland found this out, he was very indignant at the
insult. ut rn sent an embassy to him twice, explaining that it had
not been done by his consent or with his knowledge. e appeased
atholwch by giving him a sound horse in place of every one that
Evnissyen had mutilated, as well as a staff of silver as large and tall
as atholwch himself, and a plate of gold as broad as atholwchs face.
To these gifts he also added a magic cauldron brought from Ireland. Its
property was that any slain man who was put into it was brought to life
again, except that he lost the use of speech. The ing of Ireland
accepted this recompense for the insult done him, renewed his friendship
with the children of Llyr, and sailed away with ranwen to Ireland.

efore a year was over, ranwen bore a son. They called him wern, and
put him out to be fosternursed among the best men of Ireland. ut,
during the second year, news came to Ireland of the insult that
atholwch had received in ritain. The ing of Irelands fosterbrothers
and near relations insisted that he should revenge himself upon ranwen.
o the ueen was compelled to serve in the kitchen, and, every day, the
butcher gave her a box upon the ear. That this should not become known
to rn, all traffic was forbidden between Ireland and ritain. This
went on for three years.

ut, in the meantime, ranwen had reared a tame starling, and she taught
it to speak, and tied a letter of complaint to the root of its wing, and
sent it off to ritain. At last it found rn, whom its mistress had
described to it, and settled upon his shoulder, ruffling its wings. This
exposed the letter, and rn read it. e sent messengers to one hundred
and fortyfour countries, to raise an army to go to Ireland. Leaving his
son aradawc, with seven others, in charge of ritain, he
startedhimself wading through the sea, while his men went by ship.

o one in Ireland knew that they were coming until the royal swineherds,
tending their pigs near the seashore, beheld a marvel. They saw a
forest on the surface of the seaa place where certainly no forest had
been beforeand, near it, a mountain with a lofty ridge on its top, and
a lake on each side of the ridge. oth the forest and the mountain were
swiftly moving towards Ireland. They informed atholwch, who could not
understand it, and sent messengers to ask ranwen what she thought it
might be. It is the men of the Island of the ighty, said she,
who are coming here because they have heard of my illtreatment. The
forest that is seen on the sea is made of the masts of ships. The
mountain is my brother rn, wading into shoal water the lofty ridge is
his nose, and the two lakes, one on each side of it, are his eyes.

The men of Ireland were terrified. They fled beyond the hannon, and
broke down the bridge over it. ut rn lay down across the river, and
his army walked over him to the opposite side.

atholwch now sent messengers suing for peace. e offered to resign the
throne of Ireland to wern, ranwens son and rns nephew. hall I
not have the kingdom myself said rn, and would not hear of anything
else. o the counsellors of atholwch advised him to conciliate rn by
building him a house so large that it would be the first house that had
ever held him, and, in it, to hand over the kingdom to his will. rn
consented to accept this, and the vast house was built.

It concealed treachery. pon each side of the hundred pillars of the
house was hung a bag, and in the bag was an armed man, who was to cut
himself out at a given signal. ut Evnissyen came into the house, and
seeing the bags there, suspected the plot. What is in this bag he
said to one of the Irish, as he came up to the first one. eal,
replied the Irishman. Then Evnissyen kneaded the bag in his hands, as
though it really contained meal, until he had killed the man inside and
he treated all of them in turn in the same way.

A little later, the two hosts met in the house. The men of Ireland came
in on one side, and the men of ritain on the other, and met at the
hearth in the middle, and sat down. The Irish court did homage to rn,
and they crowned wern, ranwens son, ing of Ireland in place of
atholwch. When the ceremonies were over, the boy went from one to
another of his uncles, to make acuaintance with them. rn fondled and
caressed him, and so did anawyddan, and issyen. ut when he came to
Evnissyen, the wicked son of Penardun seized the child by the feet, and
dropped him head first into the great fire.

When ranwen saw her son killed, she tried to leap into the flames after
him, but rn held her back. Then every man armed himself, and such a
tumult was never heard in one house before. ay after day they fought
but the Irish had the advantage, for they had only to plunge their dead
men into the magic cauldron to bring them back to life. When Evnissyen
knew this, he saw a way of atoning for the misfortunes his evil nature
had brought upon ritain. e disguised himself as an Irishman, and lay
upon the floor as if dead, until they put him into the cauldron. Then he
stretched himself, and, with one desperate effort, burst both the
cauldron and his own heart.

Thus things were made eual again, and in the next battle the men of
ritain killed all the Irish. ut of themselves there were only seven
left unhurtPryderi anawyddan luneu, the son of Taran Taliesin
the ard Ynawc rudyen, the son of uryel and eilyn, the son of
wynn the Ancient.

rn himself was wounded in the foot with a poisoned dart, and was in
agony. o he ordered his seven surviving followers to cut off his head,
and to take it to the White ount in London, and bury it there,
with the face towards France. e prophesied how they would perform the
ourney. At arlech they would be feasting seven years, the birds of
hiannon singing to them all the time, and rns own head conversing
with them as agreeably as when it was on his body. Then they would be
fourscore years at wales. All this while, rns head would remain
uncorrupted, and would talk so pleasantly that they would forget the
flight of time. ut, at the destined hour, someone would open a door
which looked towards ornwall, and, after that, they could stay no
longer, but must hurry to London to bury the head.

o the seven beheaded rn, and set off, taking ranwen also with them.
They landed at the mouth of the iver Alaw, in Anglesey. ranwen first
looked back towards Ireland, and then forward towards ritain. Alas,
she cried, that I was ever born two islands have been destroyed
because of me. er heart broke with sorrow, and she died. An old Welsh
poem says, with a touch of real pathos

                oftened were the voices in the brakes
                 f the wondering birds
                 n seeing the fair body.
                 Will there not be relating again
                 f that which befel the paragon
                 At the stream of Amlwch

They made her a foursided grave, says the abinogi, and buried her
upon the banks of the Alaw. The traditionary spot has always borne the
name of Ynys ranwen, and, curiously enough, an urn was found there,
in , full of ashes and halfburnt bones, which certain enthusiastic
local antiuaries saw every reason to suppose were those of the fair
ritish Aphrodit herself.

The seven went on towards arlech, and, as they ourneyed, they met men
and women who gave them the latest news. aswallawn, a son of eli, the
husband of n, had destroyed the ministers left behind by rn to take
care of ritain. e had made himself invisible by the help of a magic
veil, and thus had killed all of them except Pendaran yfed,
fosterfather of Pryderi, who had escaped into the woods, and aradawc
son of rn, whose heart had broken from grief. Thus he had made himself
king of the whole island in place of anawyddan, its rightful heir now
that rn was dead.

owever, the destiny was upon the seven that they should go on with
their leaders head. They went to arlech and feasted for seven years,
the three birds of hiannon singing them songs compared with which all
other songs seemed unmelodious. Then they spent fourscore years in the
Isle of wales, eating and drinking, and listening to the pleasant
conversation of rns head. The Entertaining of the oble ead this
eighty years feast was called. rns head, indeed, is almost more
notable in ritish mythology than rn before he was decapitated.
Taliesin and the other bards invoke it repeatedly as rddawl en the
enerable ead and ther en the Wonderful ead.

ut all pleasure came to an end when eilyn, the son of wynn, opened
the forbidden door, like luebeards wife, to know if that was true
which was said concerning it. As soon as they looked towards ornwall,
the glamour that had kept them merry for eightyseven years failed, and
left them as grieved about the death of their lord as though it had
happened that very day. They could not rest for sorrow, but went at once
to London, and laid the now dumb and corrupting head in its grave on
Tower ill, with its face turned towards France, to watch that no foe
came from foreign lands to ritain. There it reposed until, ages
afterwards, Arthur, in his pride of heart, dug it up, as he thought it
beneath his dignity to hold the island otherwise than by valour.
isaster, in the shape of

                            the godless hosts
            f heathen swarming oer the orthern sea,

came of this disinterment and therefore it is called, in a triad, one
of the Three Wicked ncoverings of ritain.



Footnote 

  etold from Lady uests translation of the abinogi of ranwen, the
  aughter of Llyr.

Footnote 

  hysLectures on Welsh Philologycompares atholwch with th, and
  the story, generally, with the reek myth of Persephon.

Footnote 

  A bardic name for ritain.

Footnote 

  This personage may have been the same as the aulish god Taranis.
  ention, too, is made in an ancient Irish glossary of Etirun, an idol
  of the ritons.

Footnote 

  This spot, called by a twelfthcentury Welsh poet The White Eminence
  of London, a place of splendid fame, was probably the hill on which
  the Tower of London now stands.

Footnote 

  The island of resholm, off the coast of Pembrokeshire.

Footnote 

  The ododin of Aneurin, as translated by T. tephens. ranwen is
  there called the lady radwen.

Footnote 

  ee note to ranwen, the aughter of Llyr in Lady uests
  abinogion.

Footnote 

  Tennyson Idylls of the inguinevere.






                              APTE I

                      TE WA F EATET


anawyddan was now the sole survivor of the family of Llyr. e was
homeless and landless. ut Pryderi offered to give him a realm in yfed,
and his mother, hiannon, for a wife. The lady, her son explained, was
still not uncomely, and her conversation was pleasing. anawyddan seems
to have found her attractive, while hiannon was not less taken with the
son of Llyr. They were wedded, and so great became the friendship of
Pryderi and icva, anawyddan and hiannon, that the four were seldom
apart.

ne day, after holding a feast at arberth, they went up to the same
magic mound where hiannon had first met Pwyll. As they sat there,
thunder pealed, and immediately a thick mist sprang up, so that not one
of them could see the other. When it cleared, they found themselves
alone in an uninhabited country. Except for their own castle, the land
was desert and untilled, without sign of dwelling, man, or beast. ne
touch of some unknown magic had utterly changed the face of yfed from a
rich realm to a wilderness.

anawyddan and Pryderi, hiannon and icva traversed the country on all
sides, but found nothing except desolation and wild beasts. For two
years they lived in the open upon game and honey.

uring the third year, they grew weary of this wild life, and decided to
go into Lloegyr, and support themselves by some handicraft.
anawyddan could make saddles, and he made them so well that soon no one
in ereford, where they had settled, would buy from any saddler but
himself. This aroused the enmity of all the other saddlers, and they
conspired to kill the strangers. o the four went to another city.

ere they made shields, and soon no one would purchase a shield unless
it had been made by anawyddan and Pryderi. The shieldmakers became
ealous, and again a move had to be made.

ut they fared no better at the next town, where they practised the
craft of cordwainers, anawyddan shaping the shoes and Pryderi stitching
them. o they went back to yfed again, and occupied themselves in
hunting.

ne day, the hounds of anawyddan and Pryderi roused a white wild boar.
They chased it till they came to a castle at a place where both the
huntsmen were certain that no castle had been before. Into this castle
went the boar, and the hounds after it. For some time, anawyddan and
Pryderi waited in vain for their return. Pryderi then proposed that he
should go into the castle, and see what had become of them. anawyddan
tried to dissuade him, declaring that whoever their enemy was who had
laid yfed waste had also caused the appearance of this castle. ut
Pryderi insisted upon entering.

In the castle, he found neither the boar nor his hounds, nor any trace
of man or beast. There was nothing but a fountain in the centre of the
castle floor, and, on the brink of the fountain, a beautiful golden bowl
fastened to a marble slab by chains.

Pryderi was so pleased with the beauty of the bowl that he put out his
hands and took hold of it. Whereupon his hands stuck to the bowl, so
that he could not move from where he stood.

anawyddan waited for him till the evening, and then returned to the
palace, and told hiannon. he, more daring than her husband, rebuked
him for cowardice, and went straight to the magic castle. In the court
she found Pryderi, his hands still glued to the bowl and his feet to the
slab. he tried to free him, but became fixed, herself, and, with a clap
of thunder and a fall of mist, the castle vanished with its two
prisoners.

anawyddan was now left alone with icva, Pryderis wife. e calmed her
fears, and assured her of his protection. ut they had lost their dogs,
and could not hunt any more, so they set out together to Lloegyr, to
practise again anawyddans old trade of cordwainer. A second time, the
envious cordwainers conspired to kill them, so they were obliged to
return to yfed.

ut anawyddan took back a burden of wheat with him to arberth, and
sowed three crofts, all of which sprang up abundantly.

When harvest time came, he went to look at his first croft, and found it
ripe. I will reap this tomorrow, he said. ut in the morning he found
nothing but the bare straw. Every ear had been taken away.

o he went to the next croft, which was also ripe. ut, when he came to
cut it, he found it had been stripped like the first. Then he knew that
whoever had wasted yfed, and carried off hiannon and Pryderi, was also
at work upon his wheat.

The third croft was also ripe, and over this one he determined to keep
watch. In the evening he armed himself and waited. At midnight he heard
a great tumult, and, looking out, saw a host of mice coming. Each mouse
bit off an ear of wheat and ran off with it. e rushed among them, but
could only catch one, which was more sluggish than the rest. This one he
put into his glove, and took it back, and showed it to icva.

Tomorrow I will hang it, he said. It is not a fit thing for a man of
your dignity to hang a mouse, she replied. evertheless will I do so,
said he. o so then, said icva.

The next morning, anawyddan went to the magic mound, and set up two
forks on it, to make a gallows. e had ust finished, when a man dressed
like a poor scholar came towards him, and greeted him.

What are you doing, Lord he said.

I am going to hang a thief, replied anawyddan.

What sort of a thief I see an animal like a mouse in your hand, but a
man of rank like yours should not touch so mean a creature. Let it go
free.

I caught it robbing me, replied anawyddan, and it shall die a
thiefs death.

I do not care to see a man like you doing such a thing, said the
scholar. I will give you a pound to let it go.

I will not let it go, replied anawyddan, nor will I sell it.

As you will, Lord. It is nothing to me, returned the scholar. And he
went away.

anawyddan laid a crossbar along the forks. As he did so, another man
came by, a priest riding on a horse. e asked anawyddan what he was
doing, and was told. y lord, he said, such a reptile is worth
nothing to buy, but rather than see you degrade yourself by touching it,
I will give you three pounds to let it go.

I will take no money for it, replied anawyddan. It shall be hanged.

Let it be hanged, said the priest, and went his way.

anawyddan put the noose round the mouses neck, and was ust going to
draw it up, when he saw a bishop coming, with his whole retinue.

Thy blessing, Lord ishop, he said.

eavens blessing upon you, said the bishop. What are you doing

I am hanging a thief, replied anawyddan. This mouse has robbed me.

ince I happen to have come at its doom, I will ransom it, said the
bishop. ere are seven pounds. Take them, and let it go.

I will not let it go, replied anawyddan.

I will give you twentyfour pounds of ready money if you will let it
go, said the bishop.

I would not, for as much again, replied anawyddan.

If you will not free it for that, said the bishop, I will give you
all my horses and their baggage to let it go.

I will not, replied anawyddan.

Then name your own price, said the bishop.

That offer I accept, replied anawyddan. y price is that hiannon
and Pryderi be set free.

They shall be set free, replied the bishop.

till I will not let the mouse go, said anawyddan.

What more do you ask exclaimed the bishop.

That the charm be removed from yfed, replied anawyddan.

It shall be removed, promised the bishop. o set the mouse free.

I will not, said anawyddan, till I know who the mouse is.

he is my wife, replied the bishop, and I am called Llwyd, the son of
ilcoed, and I cast the charm over yfed, and upon hiannon and Pryderi,
to avenge wawl son of ld for the game of badger in the bag which
was played on him by Pwyll, ead of Annwn. It was my household that came
in the guise of mice and took away your corn. ut since my wife has been
caught, I will restore hiannon and Pryderi and take the charm off yfed
if you will let her go.

I will not let her go, said anawyddan, until you have promised that
there shall be no charm put upon yfed again.

I will promise that also, replied Llwyd. o let her go.

I will not let her go, said anawyddan, unless you swear to take no
revenge for this hereafter.

You have done wisely to claim that, replied Llwyd. uch trouble would
else have come upon your head because of this. ow I swear it. o set my
wife free.

I will not, said anawyddan, until I see hiannon and Pryderi.

Then he saw them coming towards him and they greeted one another.

ow set my wife free, said the bishop.

I will, gladly, replied anawyddan. o he released the mouse, and
Llwyd struck her with a wand, and turned her into a young woman, the
fairest ever seen.

And when anawyddan looked round him, he saw yfed tilled and cultivated
again, as it had formerly been.

The powers of light had, this time, the victory. Little by little, they
increased their mastery over the dominion of darkness, until we find the
survivors of the families of Llyr and Pwyll mere vassals of Arthur.



Footnote 

  etold from Lady uests translation of the abinogi of anawyddan,
  the on of Llyr.

Footnote 

  axon ritainEngland.






                               APTE 

                  TE ITIE F LIT E AE


The powers of light were, however, by no means invariably successful in
their struggles with the powers of darkness. Even wydion son of n had
to serve his apprenticeship to misfortune. Assailing aer
idiades under one of its many titles,he was caught by Pwyll and
Pryderi, and endured a long imprisonment. The sufferings he
underwent made him a bardan ancient eltic idea which one can still see
surviving in the popular tradition that whoever dares to spend a night
alone either upon the chair of the iant Idris the summit of ader
Idris, in erionethshire, or under the haunted lack tone of Arddu,
upon the Llanberis side of nowdon, will be found in the morning either
inspired or mad. ow he escaped we are not told but the episode
does not seem to have uenched his ardour against the natural enemies of
his kind.

elped by his brother, Amaethon, god of agriculture, and his son, Lleu,
he fought the attle of odeu, or the Trees, an exploit which is not
the least curious of eltic myths. It is known also as the attle of
Achren, or chren, a name for ades of unknown meaning, but appearing
again in the remarkable Welsh poem which describes the poiling of
Annwn by Arthur. The ing of Achren was Arawn and he was helped by
rn, who apparently had not then made his fatal ourney to Ireland. The
war was made to secure three boons for manthe dog, the deer, and the
lapwing, all of them creatures for some reason sacred to the gods of the
nether world.

wydion was this time not alone, as he apparently was when he made his
first unfortunate reconnaissance of ades. esides his brother and his
son, he had an army which he raised for the purpose. For a leader of
wydions magical attainments there was no need of standing troops. e
could call battalions into being with a charm, and dismiss them when
they were no longer needed. The name of the battle shows what he did on
this occasion and the bard Taliesin adds his testimony

      I have been in the battle of odeu, with Lleu and wydion,
       They changed the forms of the elementary trees and sedges.

In a poem devoted to it he describes in detail what happened. The
trees and grasses, he tells us, hurried to the fight the alders led the
van, but the willows and the uickens came late, and the birch, though
courageous, took long in arraying himself the elm stood firm in the
centre of the battle, and would not yield a foot heaven and earth
trembled before the advance of the oaktree, that stout doorkeeper
against an enemy the heroic holly and the hawthorn defended themselves
with their spikes the heather kept off the enemy on every side, and the
broom was well to the front, but the fern was plundered, and the furze
did not do well the stout, lofty pine, the intruding peartree, the
gloomy ash, the bashful chestnuttree, the prosperous beech, the
longenduring poplar, the scarce plumtree, the shelterseeking privet
and woodbine, the wild, foreign laburnum the bean, bearing in its
shade an army of phantoms rosebush, raspberry, ivy, cherrytree, and
medlarall took their parts.

In the ranks of ades there were eually strange fighters. We are told
of a hundredheaded beast, carrying a formidable battalion under the
root of its tongue and another in the back of its head there was a
gaping black toad with a hundred claws and a crested snake of many
colours, within whose flesh a hundred souls were tormented for their
sinsin fact, it would need a or or a ante to do ustice to this
weird battle between the arrayed magics of heaven and hell.

It was magic that decided its fate. There was a fighter in the ranks of
ades who could not be overcome unless his antagonist guessed his namea
peculiarity of the terrene gods, remarks Professor hys, which has
been preserved in our popular fairy tales. wydion guessed the name, and
sang these two verses

          urehoofed is my steed impelled by the spur
           The high sprigs of alder are on thy shield
           rn art thou called, of the glittering branches

          urehoofed is my steed in the day of battle
           The high sprigs of alder are on thy hand
           rn ... by the branch thou bearest
           as Amaethon the ood prevailed

Thus the power of the dark gods was broken, and the sons of n retained
for the use of men the deer, the dog, and the lapwing, stolen from that
underworld, whence all good gifts came.

It was always to obtain some practical benefit that the gods of light
fought against the gods of darkness. The last and greatest of wydions
raids upon ades was undertaken to procurepork

wydion had heard that there had come to yfed some strange beasts, such
as had never been seen before. They were called pigs or swine, and
Arawn, ing of Annwn, had sent them as a gift to Pryderi son of Pwyll.
They were small animals, and their flesh was said to be better than the
flesh of oxen. e thought it would be a good thing to get them, either
by force or fraud, from the dark powers. th son of thonwy, who ruled
the children of n from his lympus of aer athyl, gave his
consent, and wydion set off, with eleven others, to Pryderis
palace. They disguised themselves as bards, so as to be received by
Pryderi, and wydion, who was the best teller of tales in the world,
entertained the Prince of yfed and his court more than they had ever
been entertained by any storyteller before. Then he asked Pryderi to
grant him a boonthe animals which had come from Annwn. ut Pryderi had
pledged his word to Arawn that he would neither sell nor give away any
of the new creatures until they had increased to double their number,
and he told the disguised wydion so.

Lord, said wydion, I can set you free from your promise. either
give me the swine at once, nor yet refuse them to me altogether, and
tomorrow I will show you how.

e went to the lodging Pryderi had assigned him, and began to work his
charms and illusions. ut of fungus he made twelve gilded shields, and
twelve horses with gold harness, and twelve black greyhounds with white
breasts, each wearing a golden collar and leash. And these he showed to
Pryderi.

Lord, said he, there is a release from the word you spoke last
evening concerning the swinethat you may neither give them nor sell
them. You may exchange them for something which is better. I will give
you these twelve horses with their gold harness, and these twelve
greyhounds with their gold collars and leashes, and these twelve gilded
shields for them.

Pryderi took counsel with his men, and agreed to the bargain. o wydion
and his followers took the swine and went away with them, hurrying as
fast as they could, for wydion knew that the illusion would not last
longer than a day. The memory of their ourney was long kept up every
place where they rested between yfed and aer athyl is remembered by a
name connecting it with pigs. There is a ochdrev wines Town in
each of the three counties of ardiganshire, ontgomeryshire, and
enbighshire, and a astell y och wines astle near ochnant
wines rook, which runs through part of the two latter counties.
They shut up the pigs in safety, and then assembled all ths army for
the horses and hounds and shields had returned to fungus, and Pryderi,
who guessed wydions part in it, was coming northward in hot haste.

There were two battlesone at aenor Penardd, near onway, and the other
at aenor Alun, now called oed elen, near aernarvon. eaten in both,
Pryderi fell back upon ant all, about nine miles from aernarvon. ere
he was again defeated with great slaughter, and sent hostages, asking
for peace and a safe retreat.

This was granted by th but, none the less, the army of the sons of
n insisted on following the retreating host, and harassing it. o
Pryderi sent a complaint to th, demanding that, if there must still be
war, wydion, who had caused all the trouble, should fight with him in
single combat.

wydion agreed, and the champions of light and darkness met face to
face. ut Pryderi was the waning power, and he fell before the strength
and magic of wydion. And at aen Tyriawc, above elenryd, was he
buried, and there is his grave, says the abinogi, though the ancient
Welsh poem, called the erses of the raves of the Warriors,
assigns him a different restingplace.

This decisive victory over ades and its kings was the end of the
struggle, until it was renewed, with still more complete success, by one
greater than wydionthe invincible Arthur.



Footnote 

  r the eltic Elysium, a mythical country beneath the waves of the
  sea.

Footnote 

  ee the poiling of Annwn, uoted in chap. IThe ythological
  oming of Arthur.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, pp. .

Footnote 

  ook of Taliesin III, ol. I, p. , of kene. I have followed
  kenes translation, with the especial exception of the curious line
  referring to the bean, so translated in . W. ashs Taliesin. If a
  correct rendering of the Welsh original, it offers an interesting
  parallel to certain superstitions of the reeks concerning this
  vegetable.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, note to p. .

Footnote 

  Lady uests translation in her notes to ulhwch and lwen.

Footnote 

  The following episode is retold from Lady uests translation of the
  abinogi of th, on of athonwy.

Footnote 

  ow called Pen y aer. It is on the summit of a hill halfway between
  Llanrwst and onway, and about a mile from the station of Llanbedr.

Footnote 

  aid to have been at huddlan Teivi, which is, perhaps, lan Teivy,
  near ardigan ridge.

Footnote 

  Poem I in the lack ook of aermarthen, ol. I, p. , of kene.

Footnote 

                In Aber wenoli is the grave of Pryderi,
                Where the waves beat against the land.






                              APTE I

                  TE YTLIAL I F AT


The oming of Arthur, his sudden rise into prominence, is one of the
many problems of the eltic mythology. e is not mentioned in any of the
Four ranches of the abinogi, which deal with the races of ritish gods
euivalent to the aelic Tuatha  anann. The earliest references to
him in Welsh literature seem to treat him as merely a warriorchieftain,
no better, if no worse, than several others, such as eraint, a
tributary prince of evon, immortalized both by the bards and by
Tennyson. Then, following upon this, we find him lifted to the
extraordinary position of a king of gods, to whom the old divine
families of n, of Llyr, and of Pwyll pay unuestioned homage. Triads
tell us that Lluddthe eus of the older Pantheonwas one of Arthurs
Three hief Warnights, and Arawn, ing of ades, one of his Three
hief ounselling nights. In the story called the ream of honabwy,
in the ed ook of ergest, he is shown as a leader to whom are subect
those we know to have been of divine racesons of udd, of Llyr, of
rn, of ovannan, and of Arianrod. In another ed ook tale, that of
ulhwch and lwen, even greater gods are his vassals. Amaethon son of
n, ploughs for him, and ovannan son of n, rids the iron, while two
other sons of eli, ynniaw and Peibaw, turned into oxen on account of
their sins, toil at the yoke, that a mountain may be cleared and tilled
and the harvest reaped in one day. e assembles his champions to seek
the treasures of ritain and anawyddan son of Llyr, wyn son of
udd, and Pryderi son of Pwyll rally round him at his call.

The most probable, and only adeuate explanation, is given by Professor
hys, who considers that the fames of two separate Arthurs have been
accidentally confused, to the exceeding renown of a composite,
halfreal, halfmythical personage into whom the two blended. ne
of these was a divine Arthur, a god more or less widely worshipped in
the eltic worldthe same, no doubt, whom an ex voto inscription found
in southeastern France calls ercurius Artaius. The other was a
human Arthur, who held among the ritons the post which, under oman
domination, had been called omes ritanni. This ount of ritain
was the supreme military authority he had a roving commission to defend
the country against foreign invasion and under his orders were two
slightly subordinate officers, the ux ritanniarum uke of the
ritains, who had charge of the northern wall, and the omes Littoris
axonici ount of the axon hore, who guarded the southeastern
coasts. The ritons, after the departure of the omans, long kept intact
the organization their conuerors had built up and it seems reasonable
to believe that this post of leader in war was the same which early
Welsh literature describes as that of emperor, a title given to Arthur
alone among the ritish heroes. The fame of Arthur the Emperor
blended with that of Arthur the od, so that it became conterminous with
the area over which we have traced rythonic settlement in reat
ritain. ence the many disputes, ably, if unprofitably, conducted,
over Arthurian localities and the sites of such cities as amelot, and
of Arthurs twelve great battles. istorical elements doubtless coloured
the tales of Arthur and his companions, but they are none the less as
essentially mythic as those told of their aelic analoguesthe ed
ranch eroes of lster and the Fenians.

f those two cycles, it is with the latter that the Arthurian legend
shows most affinity. Arthurs position as supreme warleader of
ritain curiously parallels that of Finns as general of a native Irish
militia. is ound Table of warriors also reminds one of Finns
Fenians sworn to adventure. oth alike battle with human and superhuman
foes. oth alike harry Europe, even to the walls of ome. The lovestory
of Arthur, his wife wynhwyvar uinevere, and his nephew edrawt
ordred, resembles in several ways that of Finn, his wife rainne, and
his nephew iarmait. In the stories of the last battles of Arthur and of
the Fenians, the essence of the kindred myth still subsists, though the
actual exponents of it slightly differ. At the fight of amlan, it was
Arthur and edrawt themselves who fought the final duel. ut in the last
stand of the Fenians at abhra, the original protagonists have given
place to their descendants and representatives. oth Finn and ormac
were already dead. It is scar, Finns grandson, and airbr, ormacs
son, who fight and slay each other. And again, ust as Arthur was
thought by many not to have really died, but to have passed to the
island valley of Avilion, so a cottish legend tells us how, ages after
the Fenians, a man, landing by chance upon a mysterious western island,
met and spoke with Finn mac oul. Even the alternative legend, which
makes Arthur and his warriors wait under the earth in a magic sleep for
the return of their triumph, is also told of the Fenians.

ut these parallels, though they illustrate Arthurs preeminence, do
not show his real place among the gods. To determine this, we must
examine the ranks of the older dynasties carefully, to see if any are
missing whose attributes this newcomer may have inherited. We find
Lludd and wyn, Arawn, Pryderi, and anawyddan side by side with him
under their own names. Among the children of n are Amaethon and
ovannan. ut here the list stops, with a notable omission. There is no
mention, in later myth, of wydion. That greatest of the sons of n has
fallen out, and vanished without a sign.

ingularly enough, too, the same stories that were once told of wydion
are now attached to the name of Arthur. o that we may assume, with
Professor hys, that Arthur, the prominent god of a new Pantheon, has
taken the place of wydion in the old. A comparison of
wydionmyths and Arthurmyths shows an almost exact correspondence in
everything but name.

Like wydion, Arthur is the exponent of culture and of arts. Therefore
we see him carrying on the same war against the underworld for wealth
and wisdom that wydion and the sons of n waged against the sons of
Llyr, the ea, and of Pwyll, the ead of ades.

Like wydion, too, Arthur suffered early reverses. e failed, indeed,
even where his prototype had succeeded. wydion, we know from the
abinogi of th, successfully stole Pryderis pigs, but Arthur was
utterly baffled in his attempt to capture the swine of a similar prince
of the underworld, called arch son of eirchion. Also as with
wydion, his earliest reconnaissance of ades was disastrous, and led to
his capture and imprisonment. anawyddan son of Llyr, confined him in
the mysterious and gruesome bonefortress of eth and Anoeth, and there
he languished for three days and three nights before a rescuer came in
the person of oreu, his cousin. ut, in the end, he triumphed. A
Welsh poem, ascribed to the bard Taliesin, relates, under the title The
poiling of Annwn, an expedition of Arthur and his followers into
the very heart of that country, from which he appears to have returned
for the verses are somewhat obscure with the loss of almost all his
men, but in possession of the obect of his uestthe magic cauldron of
inspiration and poetry.

Taliesin tells the story as an eyewitness. e may well have done so
for it was his boast that from the creation of the world he had allowed
himself to miss no event of importance. e was in eaven, he tells
us, when Lucifer fell, and in the ourt of n before wydion was
born he had been among the constellations both with ary agdalene and
with the pagan goddess Arianrod he carried a banner before Alexander,
and was chief director of the building of the Tower of abel he saw the
fall of Troy and the founding of ome he was with oah in the Ark, and
he witnessed the destruction of odom and omorrah and he was present
both at the anger of ethlehem and at the ross of alvary. ut,
unfortunately, Taliesin, as a credible personage, rests under exactly
the same disabilities as Arthur himself. It is not denied by scholars
that there was a real Taliesin, a sixthcentury bard to whom were
attributed, and who may have actually composed, some of the poems in the
ook of Taliesin. ut there was also another Taliesin, whom, as a
mythical poet of the ritish elts, Professor hys is inclined to euate
with the aelic ssian. The traditions of the two mingled, endowing
the historic Taliesin with the godlike attributes of his predecessor,
and clothing the mythical Taliesin with some of the actuality of his
successor.

It is regrettable that our bard did not at times sing a little less
incoherently, for his poem contains the fullest description that has
come down to us of the other world as the ritons conceived it.
Apparently the numerous names, all different and some now
untranslatable, refer to the same place, and they must be collated to
form a right idea of what Annwn was like. With the exception of an
obviously spurious last verse, here omitted, the poem is magnificently
pagan, and uite a storehouse of ritish mythology.

 I will praise the overeign, supreme Lord of the land,
  Who hath extended his dominion over the shore of the world.
  tout was the prison of weir, in aer idi,
  Through the spite of Pwyll and Pryderi
  o one before him went into it.
  The heavy blue chain firmly held the youth,
  And before the spoils of Annwn woefully he sang,
  And thenceforth till doom he shall remain a bard.
  Thrice enough to fill Prydwen we went into it
  Except seven, none returned from aer idi.

 Am I not a candidate for fame, to be heard in song
  In aer Pedryvan, four times revolving
  The first word from the cauldron, when was it spoken
  y the breath of nine maidens it was gently warmed.
  Is it not the cauldron of the chief of Annwn What is its fashion
  A rim of pearls is round its edge.
  It will not cook the food of a coward or one forsworn.
  A sword flashing bright will be raised to him,
  And left in the hand of Lleminawg.
  And before the door of the gate of ffern the lamp was burning.
  When we went with Arthura splendid labour
  Except seven, none returned from aer edwyd.

 Am I not a candidate for fame, to be heard in song
  In aer Pedryvan, in the Isle of the trong oor,
  Where twilight and pitchy darkness meet together,
  And bright wine is the drink of the host
  Thrice enough to fill Prydwen we went on the sea.
  Except seven, none returned from aer igor.

 I will not allow much praise to the leaders of literature.
  eyond aer Wydyr they saw not the prowess of Arthur
  Threescore hundreds stood on the walls
  It was hard to converse with their watchman.
  Thrice enough to fill Prydwen we went with Arthur
  Except seven, none returned from aer olud.

 I will not allow much praise to the spiritless.
  They know not on what day, or who caused it,
  r in what hour of the serene day wy was born,
  r who caused that he should not go to the dales of evwy.
  They know not the brindled ox with the broad headband,
  Whose yoke is sevenscore handbreadths.
  When we went with Arthur, of mournful memory,
  Except seven, none returned from aer andwy.

 I will not allow much praise to those of drooping courage.
  They know not on what day the chief arose,
  or in what hour of the serene day the owner was born,
  or what animal they keep, with its head of silver.
  When we went with Arthur, of anxious striving,
  Except seven, none returned from aer chren.

any of the allusions of this poem will perhaps never be explained. We
know no better than the leaders of literature whom the vainglorious
Taliesin taunted with their ignorance and lack of spirit in what hour
wy was born, or even who he was, much less who prevented him from going
to the dales of evwy, wherever they may have been. We are in the dark
as much as they were with regard to the significance of the brindled ox
with the broad headband, and of the other animal with the silver
head. ut the earlier portion of the poem is, fortunately, clearer,
and it gives glimpses of a grandeur of savage imagination. The
strongdoored, foursuare fortress of glass, manned by its dumb, ghostly
sentinels, spun round in neverceasing revolution, so that few could
find its entrance it was pitchdark save for the twilight made by the
lamp burning before its circling gate feasting went on there, and
revelry, and in its centre, choicest of its many riches, was the
pearlrimmed cauldron of poetry and inspiration, kept bubbling by the
breaths of nine ritish pythonesses, so that it might give forth its
oracles. To this scanty information we may add a few lines, also by
Taliesin, and contained in a poem called A ong oncerning the ons of
Llyr ab rochwel Powys

            Perfect is my chair in aer idi
             Plague and age hurt not him whos in it
             They know, anawyddan and Pryderi.
             Three organs round a fire sing before it,
             And about its points are oceans streams
             And the abundant well above it
             weeter than white wine the drink in it.

Little is, however, added by it to our knowledge. It reminds us that
Annwn was surrounded by the seathe heavy blue chain which held weir
so firmlyit informs us that the bright wine which was the drink of
the host was kept in a well it adds to the revelry the singing of the
three organs it makes a point that its inhabitants were freed from age
and death and, last of all, it shows us, as we might have expected, the
ubiuitous Taliesin as a privileged resident of this delightful region.
We have two clues as to where the country may have been situated. Lundy
Island, off the coast of evonshire, was anciently called Ynys Wair,
the Island of weir, or wydion. The Welsh translation of the eint
real, an Angloorman romance embodying much of the old mythology,
locates its Turning astleevidently the same as aer idiin the
district around and comprising Puffin Island off the coast of
Anglesey. ut these are slender threads by which to tether to firm
ground a realm of the imagination.

With wydion, too, have disappeared the whole of the characters
connected with him in that portion of the abinogi of th, on of
athonwy, which recounts the myth of the birth of the sungod. either
th himself, nor Lleu Llaw yffes, nor ylan, nor their mother,
Arianrod, play any more part they have vanished as completely as
wydion. ut the essence of the myth of which they were the figures
remains intact. wydion was the father by his sister Arianrod, wife of a
waning heavengod called wyvre pace, of twin sons, Lleu, a god of
light, and ylan, a god of darkness and we find this same story woven
into the very innermost texture of the legend of Arthur. The new
Arianrod, though called orgawse by ir Thomas alory, and Anna
by eoffrey of onmouth, is known to earlier Welsh myth as
wyar. he was the sister of Arthur and the wife of the skygod,
Lludd, and her name, which means shed blood or gore, reminds us of
the relationship of the orrg, the wargoddess of the aels, to the
heavengod uada. The new Lleu Llaw yffes is called walchmei,
that is, the Falcon of ay, and the new ylan is edrawt, at once
Arthurs son and walchmeis brother, and the bitterest enemy of
both.

esides these old friends with new faces, Arthur brings with him into
prominence a fresh Pantheon, most of whom also replace the older gods of
the heavens and earth and the regions under the earth. The eus of
Arthurs cycle is called yrddin, who passed into the ormanFrench
romances as erlin. All the myths told of him bear witness to his high
estate. The first name of ritain, before it was inhabited, was, we
learn from a triad, las yrddin, that is, yrddins Enclosure.
e is given a wife whose attributes recall those of the consorts of
uada and Lludd. he is described as the only daughter of oelthe
ritish name of the aulish amulus, a god of war and the skyand was
called Elen Lwyddawg, that is, Elen, Leader of osts. er memory is
still preserved in Wales in connection with ancient roadways such names
as Ffordd Elen Elens oad and arn Elen Elens auseway
seem to show that the paths on which armies marched were ascribed or
dedicated to her. As yrddins wife, she is credited with having
founded the town of armarthen aer yrddin, as well as the highest
fortress in Arvon, which must have been the site near eddgelert still
called inas Emrys, the Town of Emrys, one of yrddins epithets or
names.

Professor hys is inclined to credit yrddin, or, rather, the ritish
eus under whatever name, with having been the god especially worshipped
at tonehenge. ertainly this impressive temple, ever unroofed and
open to the sun and wind and rain of heaven, would seem peculiarly
appropriate to a ritish supreme god of light and sky. either are we
uite without documentary evidence which will allow us to connect it
with him. eoffrey of onmouth, whose historical fictions usually
conceal mythological facts, relates that the stones which compose it
were erected by erlin. efore that, they had stood in Ireland, upon a
hill which eoffrey calls ount illaraus, and which can be identified
as the same spot known to Irish legend as the ill of isnech, and,
still earlier, connected with alor. According to ritish tradition, the
primeval giants who first colonized Ireland had brought them from their
original home on the farthest coast of Africa, on account of their
miraculous virtues for any water in which they were bathed became a
sovereign remedy either for sickness or for wounds. y the order of
Aurelius, a halfreal, halfmythical king of ritain, erlin brought
them thence to England, to be set up on alisbury Plain as a monument to
the ritish chieftains treacherously slain by engist and his axons.
With this scrap of native information about tonehenge we may compare
the only other piece we havethe account of the classic iodorus, who
called it a temple of Apollo. At first, these two statements seem
to conflict. ut it is far from unlikely that the earlier eltic
settlers in ritain made little or no religious distinction between sky
and sun. The sungod, as a separate personage, seems to have been the
conception of a comparatively late age. eltic mythology allows us to be
present, as it were, at the births both of the aelic Lugh Lamhfada and
the ritish Lleu Llaw yffes.

Even the wellknown story of yrddins, or erlins final imprisonment
in a tomb of airy enchantmenta tour withouten walles, or withoute eny
closurereads marvellously like a myth of the sun with all his fires
and travelling glories round him. Encircled, shielded, and made
splendid by his atmosphere of living light, the Lord of eaven moves
slowly towards the west, to disappear at last into the sea as one local
version of the myth puts it, or on to a faroff island as another
says, or into a dark forest the choice of a third. When the myth
became finally fixed, it was ardsey Island, off the extreme westernmost
point of aernarvonshire, that was selected as his last abode. Into it
he went with nine attendant bards, taking with him the Thirteen
Treasures of ritain, thenceforth lost to men. ardsey Island no doubt
derives its name from this story and what is probably an allusion to it
is found in a firstcentury reek writer called Plutarch, who describes
a grammarian called emetrius as having visited ritain, and brought
home an account of his travels. e mentioned several uninhabited and
sacred islands off our coasts which he said were named after gods and
heroes, but there was one especially in which ronos was imprisoned with
his attendant deities, and riareus keeping watch over him as he slept
for sleep was the bond forged for him. oubtless this
disinherited deity, whom the reek, after his fashion, called ronos,
was the ritish heaven and sungod, after he had descended into the
prison of the west.

Among other newcomers is ai, who, as ir ay the eneschal, fills so
large a part in the later romances. Purged of his worst offences, and
reduced to a surly butler to Arthur, he is but a shadow of the earlier
ai who murdered Arthurs son Llacheu, and can only be acuitted,
through the obscurity of the poem that relates the incident, of having
also carried off, or having tried to carry off, Arthurs wife,
wynhwyvar. e is thought to have been a personification of
fire, upon the strength of a description given of him in the
mythical romance of ulhwch and lwen. ery subtle, it says, was
ai. When it pleased him he could render himself as tall as the highest
tree in the forest. And he had another peculiarityso great was the heat
of his nature, that, when it rained hardest, whatever he carried
remained dry for a handbreadth above and a handbreadth below his hand
and when his companions were coldest, it was to them as fuel with which
to light their fire.

Another personage who owes his prominence in the Arthurian story to his
importance in eltic myth was arch son of eirchion, whose swine Arthur
attempted to steal, as wydion had done those of Pryderi. In the
romances, he has become the cowardly and treacherous ark, king,
according to some stories, of ornwall, but according to others, of the
whole of ritain, and known to all as the husband of the Fair Isoult,
and the uncle of ir Tristrem. ut as a deformed deity of the
underworld he can be found in aelic as well as in ritish myth. e
cannot be considered as originally different from orc, a king of the
Fomors at the time when from their lass astle they so fatally
oppressed the hildren of emed. The Fomors were distinguished by
their animal features, and arch had the same peculiarity. When ir
Thomas alory relates how, to please Arthur and ir Launcelot, ir
inadan made a song about ark, which was the worst lay that ever
harper sang with harp or any other instruments, he does not tell
us wherein the sting of the lampoon lay. It no doubt reminded ing ark
of the unpleasant fact that he hadnot like his Phrygian counterpart,
asss buthorses ears. e was, in fact, a eltic idas, a distinction
which he shared with one of the mythical kings of early Ireland.

either can we pass over rien, a deity of the underworld akin to, or
perhaps the same as, rn. Like that son of Llyr, he was at once a
god of battle and of minstrelsy he was adored by the bards as
their patron his badge was the raven bran, in Welsh
while, to make his identification complete, there is an extant poem
which tells how rien, wounded, ordered his own head to be cut off by
his attendants. is wife was odron, known as the mother of
abon, the sungod to whom inscriptions exist as aponos. Another of
the children of rien and odron is wain, which was perhaps only
another name for abon. Taliesin calls him chief of the glittering
west, and he is as certainly a sungod as his father rien, lord
of the evening, was a ruler of the dark underworld.

It is by reason of the preeminence of Arthur that we find gathered
round him so many gods, all probably various tribal personifications of
the same few mythological ideas. The elts, both of the aelic and the
ritish branches, were split up into numerous petty tribes, each with
its own local deities embodying the same essential conceptions under
different names. There was the god of the underworld, gigantic in
figure, patron alike of warrior and minstrel, teacher of the arts of
elouence and literature, and owner of boundless wealth, whom some of
the ritish tribes worshipped as rn, others as rien, others as Pwyll,
or arch, or th, or Arawn, or gyrvran. There was the lord of an
elysiumades in its aspect of a paradise of the departed rather than of
the primeval subterranean realm where all things originatedwhom the
ritons of Wales called wyn, or wynwas the ritons of ornwall,
elwas and the ritons of omerset, Avallon, or Avallach. nder this
last title, his realm is called Ynys Avallon, Avallons Island, or,
as we know the word, Avilion. It was said to be in the Land of ummer,
which, in the earliest myth, signified ades and it was only in later
days that the mystic Isle of Avilion became fixed to earth as
lastonbury, and the Elysian Land of ummer as omerset. There
was a mighty ruler of heaven, a god of battles, worshipped on high
places, in whose hands was the stern arbitrament of war some knew him
as Lludd, others as yrddin, or as Emrys. There was a gentler deity,
friendly to man, to help whom he fought or caoled the powers of the
underworld wydion he was called, and Arthur. Last, perhaps, to be
imagined in concrete shape, there was a longarmed, sharpspeared
sungod who aided the culturegod in his work, and was known as Lleu, or
walchmei, or abon, or wain, or Peredur, and no doubt by many another
name and with him is usually found a brother representing not light,
but darkness. This expression of a single idea by different names may be
also observed in aelic myth, though not uite so clearly. In the
hurtling of clan against clan, many such divinities perished altogether
out of memory, or survived only as names, to make up, in Ireland, the
vast, shadowy population claiming to be Tuatha  anann, and, in
ritain, the long list of Arthurs followers. thersgods of stronger
communitieswould increase their fame as their worshippers increased
their territory, until, as happened in reece, the chief deities of many
tribes came together to form a national Pantheon.

We have already tried to explain the oming of Arthur historically.
ythologically, he came, as, according to eltic ideas, all things came
originally, from the underworld. is father is called ther
Pendragon. ut ther Pendragon is for the word dragon is not
part of the name, but a title signifying warleader ther en, that
is, rn, under his name of the Wonderful ead, so that, in spite
of the legend which describes Arthur as having disinterred rns head
on Tower ill, where it watched against invasion, because he thought it
beneath his dignity to keep ritain in any other way than by
valour, we must recognize the ing of ades as his father. This
being so, it would only be natural that he should take a wife from the
same eternal country, and we need not be surprised to find in
wynhwyvars father, gyrvran, a personage corresponding in all respects
to the eltic conception of the ruler of the underworld. e was of
gigantic size he was the owner of a cauldron out of which three
uses had been born and he was the patron of the bards, who
deemed him to have been the originator of their art. ore than this, his
very name, analysed into its original ocur vran, means the evil
bran, or raven, the bird of death.

ut Welsh tradition credits Arthur with three wives, each of them called
wynhwyvar. This peculiar arrangement is probably due to the eltic love
of triads and one may compare them with the three Etains who pass
through the mythicoheroic story of Eochaid Airem, Etain, and ider. f
these three wynhwyvars, besides the wynhwyvar, daughter of
gyrvran, one was the daughter of wyrd went, of whom we know nothing
but the name, and the other of wyrthur ap reidawl, the same ictor
son of corcher with whom wyn son of udd, fought, in earlier myth,
perpetual battle for the possession of reudylad, daughter of the
skygod Lludd. This same eternal strife between the powers of light and
darkness for the possession of a symbolical damsel is waged again in the
Arthurian cycle but it is no longer for reudylad that wyn contends,
but for wynhwyvar, and no longer with wyrthur, but with Arthur. It
would seem to have been a ornish form of the myth for the dark god is
called elwas, and not wynwas, or wyn, his name in Welsh.
elwas lay in ambush for a whole year, and finally succeeded in carrying
off wynhwyvar to his palace in Avilion. ut Arthur pursued, and
besieged that stronghold, ust as Eochaid Airem had, in the aelic
version of the universal story, mined and sapped at iders sdh of
ri Leith. ythology, as well as history, repeats itself and
elwas was obliged to restore wynhwyvar to her rightful lord.

It is not elwas, however, that in the bestknown versions of the story
contends with Arthur for the love of wynhwyvar. The most widespread
early tradition makes Arthurs rival his nephew edrawt. ere Professor
hys traces a striking parallel between the ritish legend of Arthur,
wynhwyvar, and edrawt, and the aelic story of Airem, Etain, and
ider. The two myths are practically counterparts for the names of
all the three pairs agree in their essential meaning. Airem, like
Arthur, signifies the Ploughman, the divine institutor of
agriculture Etain, the hining ne, is a fit parallel to
wynhwyvar, the White Apparition while ider and edrawt both
come from the same root, a word meaning to hit, either literally, or
else metaphorically, with the mind, in the sense of coming to a
decision. To attempt to explain this myth is to raise the vexed uestion
of the meaning of mythology. Is it day and dark that strive for dawn, or
summer and winter for the lovely spring, or does it shadow forth the
rescue of the grain that makes mans life from the devouring underworld
by the farmers wit When this can be finally resolved, a multitude of
eltic myths will be explained. Everywhere arise the same combatants for
the stolen bride one has the attributes of light, the other is a
champion of darkness.

Even in ir Thomas alorys version of the Arthurian story, taken by him
from French romances far removed from the original tradition, we find
the myth subsisting. edrawts original place as the lover of Arthurs
ueen had been taken in the romances by ir Launcelot, who, if he was
not some now undiscoverable eltic god, must have been an invention
of the orman adapters. ut the story which makes edrawt Arthurs rival
has been preserved in the account of how ir ordred would have wedded
uinevere by force, as part of the rebellion which he made against his
king and uncle. This strife was eltic myth long before it became
part of the pseudohistory of early ritain. The triads tell us how
Arthur and edrawt raided each others courts during the owners
absence. edrawt went to elli Wic, in ornwall, ate and drank
everything he could find there, and insulted ueen wynhwyvar, in
revenge for which Arthur went to edrawts court and killed man and
beast. Their struggle only ended with the attle of amlan and that
mythical combat, which chroniclers have striven to make historical, is
full of legendary detail. Tradition tells how Arthur and his antagonist
shared their forces three times during the fight, which caused it to be
known as one of the Three Frivolous attles of ritain, the idea of
doing so being one of ritains Three riminal esolutions. Four alone
survived the fray one, because he was so ugly that all shrank from him,
believing him to be a devil another, whom no one touched because he was
so beautiful that they took him for an angel a third, whose great
strength no one could resist and Arthur himself, who, after revenging
the death of walchmei upon edrawt, went to the island of Avilion to
heal him of his grievous wounds.

And thencefrom the Elysium of the eltspopular belief has always been
that he will some day return. ut ust as the gods of the aels are said
to dwell sometimes in the Land of the Living, beyond the western wave,
and sometimes in the palace of a hollow hill, so Arthur is sometimes
thought to be in Avilion, and sometimes to be sitting with his champions
in a charmed sleep in some secret place, waiting for the trumpet to be
blown that shall call him forth to reconuer ritain. The legend is
found in the Eildon ills in the nowdon district at adbury, in
omerset, the best authenticated amelot in the ale of eath, in outh
Wales as well as in other places. e slumbers, but he has not died. The
ancient Welsh poem called The erses of the raves of the
Warriors enumerates the last restingplaces of most of the ritish
gods and demigods. The grave of wydion is in the marsh of inlleu,
the grave of Lieu Llaw yffes is under the protection of the sea with
which he was familiar, and where the wave makes a sullen sound is the
grave of ylan we know the graves of Pryderi, of walchmei, of arch,
of abon, even of the great eli, but

            ot wise the thoughta grave for Arthur.



Footnote 

  A poem in praise of eraint, the brave man from the region of
  yvnaint evon ... the enemy of tyranny and oppression, is
  contained in both the lack ook of aermarthen and the ed ook of
  ergest. When eraint was born, open were the gates of heaven,
  begins its last verse. It is translated in ol. I of kene, p. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, pp. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  It is worthy of remark that the fame of Arthur is widely spread he
  is claimed alike as a prince in rittany, ornwall, Wales,
  umberland, and the Lowlands of cotland that is to say, his fame
  is conterminous with the rythonic race, and does not extend to the
  aels.hamberss Encyclopdia.

Footnote 

  For Arthurian and Fenian parallels see ampbells Popular Tales of
  the West ighlands.

Footnote 

  ee chap. I of hyss Arthurian LegendArthur, istorical and
  ythical.

Footnote 

  A triad in the engwrt . , translated by kene. It was Trystan
  who was watching the swine for his uncle, while the swineherd went
  with a message to Essylt Iseult, and Arthur desired one pig by
  deceit or by theft, and could not get it.

Footnote 

  ee note to chap. IIThe Treasures of ritain.

Footnote 

  ook of Taliesin, poem , kene, ol. I, p. .

Footnote 

  In a probably very ancient poem embedded in the sixteenthcentury
  Welsh romance called Taliesin, included by Lady uest in her
  abinogion.

Footnote 

  The existence of a sixthcentury bard of this name, a contemporary of
  the heroic stage of ritish resistance to the ermanic invaders, is
  well attested. A number of poems are found in medival Welsh .,
  chief among them the socalled ook of Taliesin, ascribed to this
  sixthcentury poet. ome of these are almost as old as any remains of
  Welsh poetry, and may go back to the early tenth or the ninth century
  others are productions of the eleventh, twelfth, and even thirteenth
  centuries.utt otes to his  edition of Lady uests
  abinogion.

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  There can be little doubt but that the sixthcentury bard succeeded
  to the form and attributes of a far older, a prehistoric, a mythic
  singer.utt otes to abinogion.

Footnote 

  I have been obliged to collate four different translators to obtain an
  acceptable version of what r. T. tephens, in his Literature of the
  ymri, calls one of the least intelligible of the mythological
  poems. y authorities have been kene, tephens, ash, and hys.

Footnote 

  A form of the name wydion.

Footnote 

  The name of Arthurs ship.

Footnote 

  evolving astle.

Footnote 

  Fourcornered astle.

Footnote 

  The old Place.

Footnote 

  astle of evelry.

Footnote 

  ingly astle.

Footnote 

  lass astle.

Footnote 

  astle of iches.

Footnote 

  eaning is unknown. ee chap. IThe ods of the ritons.

Footnote 

  eaning is unknown. ee chap. The ictories of Light over
  arkness.

Footnote 

  nless they should be the yellow and the brindled bull mentioned in
  the story of ulhwch and lwen.

Footnote 

  ook of Taliesin, poem I. The translation is by hys Arthurian
  Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibid., chap. I.

Footnote 

  alorys orte arthur, ook II, chap. II.

Footnote 

  istoria ritonum, ook III, chap. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibid., pp. .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  ee hyss exposition of the mythological meaning of the ed ook
  romance of the ream of axen Wledig, in his ibbert Lectures, pp.
  .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, pp. .

Footnote 

  istoria ritonum, ook III, chaps. III.

Footnote 

  ee chap. I and hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, pp. , .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  Plutarch e efectu raculorum.

Footnote 

  The eint real, uoted by hys Arthurian Legend, pp. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  Elton rigins of English istory, p. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  The name arch means horse.

Footnote 

  orte arthur. ook , chap. II.

Footnote 

  alled Labraid Longsech.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend. ee chap. Irien and his ongeners.

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  ed ook of ergest, II. hys Arthurian Legend, pp. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  Ibid.

Footnote 

  The eathsong of wain. Taliesin, LI, kene, ol. I, p. .

Footnote 

  ook of Taliesin, II. kene, however, translates the word rendered
  evening by hys as cultivated plain.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  oth by alory and eoffrey of onmouth.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  ee chap. IIIThe Wooing of ranwen and the eheading of rn.

Footnote 

  e is called gyrvran the iant.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, pp. .

Footnote 

  hys Lectures on Welsh Philology, p. . ut the derivation is
  only tentative, and an interesting alternative one is given, which
  euates him with the Persian Ahriman.

Footnote 

  The enumeration of Arthurs three wynhwyvars forms one of the Welsh
  triads.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe ods in Exile.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, chap. IIArthur and Airem.

Footnote 

  In the mysterious Lancelot, not found in Arthurian story before the
  orman adaptations of it, Professor hys is inclined to see a ritish
  sungod, or solar hero. A number of interesting comparisons are drawn
  between him and the Peredur and wain of the later abinogion tales,
  as well as with the aelic uchulainn. ee tudies in the Arthurian
  Legend.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  The fullest list of translated triads is contained in the appendix to
  Proberts Ancient Laws of ambria, . any are also given as an
  appendix in kenes Four Ancient ooks of Wales.

Footnote 

  lack ook of aermarthen I, ol. I, pp.  in kene.

Footnote 

  This is Professor hyss translation of the Welsh line, no doubt more
  strictly correct than the famous rendering nknown is the grave of
  Arthur.






                              APTE II

                        TE TEAE F ITAI


It is in keeping with the mythological character of Arthur that the
early Welsh tales recorded of him are of a different nature from those
which swell the pseudohistories of ennius and of eoffrey of
onmouth. We hear nothing of that subugation of the countries of
Western Europe which fills so large a part in the two books of the
istoria ritonum which eoffrey has devoted to him. onueror he
is, but his conuests are not in any land known to geographers. It is
against ades, and not against ome, that he achieves his highest
triumphs. This is the true history of ing Arthur, and we may read more
fragments and snatches of it in two prosetales preserved in the ed
ook of ergest. oth these tales date, in the actual form in which they
have come down to us, from the twelfth century. ut, in each of them,
the writer seems to be stretching out his hands to gather in the dying
traditions of a very remote past.

When a Welsh manatarms named honabwy lay down, one night, to sleep
upon a yellow calfskin, the only furniture in a noisome hut, in which
he had taken shelter, that was comparatively free from vermin, he had
the vision which is related in the tale called The ream of
honabwy. e thought that he was travelling with his companions
towards the evern, when they heard a rushing noise behind them, and,
looking back, saw a gigantic rider upon a monstrous horse. o terrible
was the horsemans appearance that they all started to run from him. ut
their running was of no avail, for every time the horse drew in its
breath, it sucked them back to its very chest, only, however, to fling
them forward as it breathed out again. In despair they fell down and
besought their pursuers mercy. e granted it, asked their names, and
told them, in return, his own. e was known as Iddawc the Agitator of
ritain for it was he who, in his love of war, had purposely
precipitated the attle of amlan. Arthur had sent him to reason with
edrawt but though Arthur had charged him with the fairest sayings he
could think of, Iddawc translated them into the harshest he could
devise. ut he had done seven years penance, and had been forgiven, and
was now riding to Arthurs camp. Thither he insisted upon taking
honabwy and his companions.

Arthurs army was encamped for a mile around the ford of hyd y roes,
upon both sides of the road and on a small flat island in the middle of
the river was the Emperor himself, in converse with edwini the ishop
and warthegyd, the son of aw. Like ssian, when he came back to
Ireland after his three hundred years soourn in the Land of
Promise, Arthur marvelled at the puny size of the people whom
Iddawc had brought for him to look at. And where, Iddawc, didst thou
find these little men I found them, Lord, up yonder on the road.
Then the Emperor smiled. Lord, said Iddawc, wherefore dost thou
laugh Iddawc, replied Arthur, I laugh not but it pitieth me that
men of such stature as these should have this island in their keeping,
after the men that guarded it of yore. Then he turned away, and Iddawc
told honabwy and his companions to keep silent, and they would see what
they would see.

The scope of such a book as this allows no space to describe the persons
and euipments of the warriors who came riding down with their companies
to oin Arthur, as he made his great march to fight the attle of adon,
thought by some to be historical, and located at ath. The reader who
turns to the tale itself will see what honabwy saw. any of Arthurs
warriors he will know by name aradawc the trongarmed, who is here
called a son, not of rn, but of Llyr arch son of eirchion, the
underworld king ai, described as the fairest horseman in all Arthurs
court walchmei, the son of wyar and of Arthur himself abon, the
son of odron Trystan son of Tallwch, the lover of The Fair Isoult
oreu, Arthurs cousin and his rescuer from anawyddans boneprison
these, and many more, will pass before him, as they passed before
honabwy during the three days and three nights that he slept and
dreamed upon the calfskin.

This story of the ream of honabwy, elaborate as it is in all its
details, is yet, in substance, little more than a catalogue. The
intention of its unknown author seems to have been to draw a series of
pictures of what he considered to be the principal among Arthurs
followers. The other storythat of ulhwch and lwenalso takes this
catalogue form, but the matters enumerated are of a different kind. It
is not so much a record of men as of things. ot the heroes of ritain,
but the treasures of ritain are its subect. ne might compare it with
the aelic story of the adventures of the three sons of Tuirenn.

The Thirteen Treasures of ritain were famous in early legend. They
belonged to gods and heroes, and were current in our island till the end
of the divine age, when erlin, fading out of the world, took them with
him into his airy tomb, never to be seen by mortal eyes again. According
to tradition, they consisted of a sword, a basket, a drinkinghorn,
a chariot, a halter, a knife, a cauldron, a whetstone, a garment, a pan,
a platter, a chessboard, and a mantle, all possessed of not less
marvellous ualities than the apples, the pigskin, the spear, the
horses and chariot, the pigs, the houndwhelp, and the cookingspit
which the sons of Tuirenn obtained for Lugh. It is these same
legendary treasures that reappear, no doubt, in the story of ulhwch
and lwen. The number tallies, for there are thirteen of them. ome are
certainly, and others probably, identical with those of the other
tradition. That there should be discrepancies need cause no surprise,
for it is not unlikely that there were several different versions of
their legend. Everyone had heard of the Thirteen Treasures of ritain.
any, no doubt, disputed as to what they were. thers might ask whence
they came. The story of ulhwch and lwen was composed to tell them.
They were won by Arthur and his mighty men.

ulhwch is the hero of the story and lwen is its heroine, but
only, as it were, by courtesy. The pair provide a loveinterest which,
as in the tales of all primitive people, is kept in the background. The
woman, in such romances, takes the place of the gold and gems in a
modern treasurehunt story she is won by overcoming external
obstacles, and not by any difficulty in obtaining her own consent. In
this romance, ulhwch was the son of a king who afterwards married
a widow with a grownup daughter, whom his stepmother urged ulhwch to
marry. n his modestly replying that he was not yet of an age to wed,
she laid the destiny on him that he should never have a wife at all,
unless he could win lwen, the daughter of a terrible father called
awthorn, hief of iants.

The hief of iants was as hostile to suitors as he was monstrous in
shape and no wonder for he knew that on his daughters marriage his
own life would come to an end. oth in this peculiarity and in the
description of his ponderous eyebrows, which fell so heavily over his
eyes that he could not see until they had been lifted up with forks, he
reminds one of the Fomor, alor. f his daughter, on the other hand, the
Welsh tale gives a description as beautiful as lwen was, herself. ore
yellow was her head than the flower of the broom, and her skin was
whiter than the foam of the wave, and fairer were her hands and her
fingers than the blossoms of the wood anemone amidst the spray of the
meadowfountain. The eye of the trained hawk, the glance of the
threemewed falcon was not brighter than hers. er bosom was more snowy
than the breast of the white swan, her cheek was redder than the reddest
roses. Whoso beheld her was filled with her love. Four white trefoils
sprung up wherever she trod. And therefore was she called lwen.

ulhwch had no need to see her to fall in love with her. e blushed at
her very name, and asked his father how he could obtain her in marriage.
is father reminded him that he was Arthurs cousin, and advised him to
claim lwen from him as a boon.

o ulhwch pricked forth upon a steed with head dappled grey, of four
winters old, firm of limb, with shellformed hoofs, having a bridle of
linked gold on his head, and upon him a saddle of costly gold. And in
the youths hand were two spears of silver, sharp, welltempered, headed
with steel, three ells in length, of an edge to wound the wind, and
cause blood to flow, and swifter than the fall of the dewdrop from the
blade of reedgrass upon the earth when the dew of une is at the
heaviest. A goldhilted sword was upon his thigh, the blade of which was
of gold, bearing a cross of inlaid gold of the hue of the lightning of
heaven his warhorn was of ivory. efore him were two brindled
whitebreasted greyhounds, having strong collars of rubies about their
necks, reaching from the shoulder to the ear. And the one that was on
the left side bounded across to the right side, and the one on the right
to the left, and like two seaswallows sported around him. And his
courser cast up four sods with his four hoofs, like four swallows in the
air, about his head, now above, now below. About him was a fourcornered
cloth of purple, and an apple of gold was at each corner, and every one
of the apples was of the value of an hundred kine. And there was
precious gold of the value of three hundred kine upon his shoes, and
upon his stirrups, from his knee to the tip of his toe. And the blade of
grass bent not beneath him, so light was his coursers tread as he
ourneyed towards the gate of Arthurs palace.

or did this bold suitor stand greatly upon ceremony. e arrived after
the portal of the palace had been closed for the night, and, contrary to
all precedent, sent to Arthur demanding instant entry. Although, too, it
was the custom for visitors to dismount at the horseblock at the gate,
he did not do so, but rode his charger into the hall. After greetings
had passed between him and Arthur, and he had announced his name, he
demanded lwen for his bride at the hands of the Emperor and his
warriors.

either Arthur nor any of his court had ever heard of lwen. owever, he
promised his cousin either to find her for him, or to prove that there
was no such person. e ordered his most skilful warriors to accompany
ulhwch ai, with his companion edwyr, the swiftest of men ynddelig,
who was as good a guide in a strange country as in his own wrhyr, who
knew all the languages of men, as well as of all other creatures
walchmei, who never left an adventure unachieved and enw, who could
render himself and his companions invisible at will.

They travelled until they came to a castle on an open plain. Feeding on
the plain was a countless herd of sheep, and, on a mound close by, a
monstrous shepherd with a monstrous dog. enw cast a spell over the dog,
and they approached the shepherd. e was called ustennin, a brother of
awthorn, while his wife was a sister of ulhwchs own mother. The evil
chief of giants had reduced his brother to servitude, and murdered all
his twentyfour sons save one, who was kept hidden in a stone chest.
Therefore he welcomed ulhwch and the embassy from Arthur, and promised
to help them secretly, the more readily since ai offered to take the
one surviving son under his protection. ustennins wife procured
ulhwch a secret meeting with lwen, and the damsel did not altogether
discourage her wooers suit.

The party started for awthorns castle. Without raising any alarm, they
slew the nine porters and the nine watchdogs, and came unhindered into
the hall. They greeted the ponderous giant, and announced the reason of
their coming. Where are my pages and my servants he said. aise up
the forks beneath my two eyebrows which have fallen over my eyes, so
that I may see the fashion of my soninlaw. e glared at them, and
told them to come again upon the next day.

They turned to go, and, as they did so, awthorn seized a poisoned dart,
and threw it after them. ut edwyr caught it, and cast it back,
wounding the giants knee. They left him grumbling, slept at the house
of ustennin, and returned, the next morning.

Again they demanded lwen from her father, threatening him with death if
he refused. er four greatgrandmothers, and her four greatgrandsires
are yet alive, replied awthorn it is needful that I take counsel of
them. o they turned away, and, as they went, he flung a second dart,
which enw caught, and hurled back, piercing the giants body.

The next time they came, awthorn warned them not to shoot at him again,
unless they desired death. Then he ordered his eyebrows to be lifted up,
and, as soon as he could see, he flung a poisoned dart straight at
ulhwch. ut the suitor himself caught it, and flung it back, so that it
pierced awthorns eyeball and came out through the back of his head.
ere again we are reminded of the myth of Lugh and alor. awthorn,
however, was not killed, though he was very much discomforted. A cursed
ungentle soninlaw, truly he complained. As long as I remain alive,
my eyesight will be the worse. Whenever I go against the wind, my eyes
will water and peradventure my head will burn, and I shall have a
giddiness every new moon. ursed be the fire in which it was forged
Like the bite of a mad dog is the stroke of this poisoned iron.

It was now the turn of ulhwch and his party to warn the giant that
there must be no more dartthrowing. e appeared, indeed, more amenable
to reason, and allowed himself to be placed opposite to ulhwch, in a
chair, to discuss the amount of his daughters brideprice.

Its terms, as he gradually unfolded them, were terrific. The bloodfine
paid for ian to Lugh seems, indeed, a trifle beside it. To obtain
grain, for food and liuor at his daughters wedding, a vast hill which
he showed to ulhwch must be rooted up, levelled, ploughed, sown, and
harvested in one day. o one could do this except Amaethon son of n,
the divine husbandman, and ovannan son of n, the divine smith, and
they must have the service of three pairs of magic oxen. e must also
have returned to him the same nine bushels of flax which he had sown in
his youth, and which had never come up for only out of this very flax
should be made the white wimple for lwens head. For mead, too, he must
have honey nine times sweeter than the honey of the virgin swarm.

Then followed the enumeration of the thirteen treasures to be paid to
him as dowry. uch a list of wedding presents was surely never known o
pot could hold such honey as he demanded but the magic vessel of Llwyr,
the son of Llwyryon. There would not be enough food for all the
weddingguests, unless he had the basket of wyddneu aranhir, from
which all the men in the world could be fed, thrice nine at a time. o
cauldron could cook the meat, except that of iwrnach the ael. The
mystic drinkinghorn of wlgawd ododin must be there, to give them
drink. The harp of Teirtu, which, like the agdas, played of itself,
must make music for them. The giant fatherinlaws hair could only be
shorn with one instrumentthe tusk of Whitetooth, ing of the oars,
and not even by that unless it was plucked alive out of its owners
mouth. Also, before the hair could be cut, it must be spread out, and
this could not be done until it had been first softened with the blood
of the perfectly black sorceress, daughter of the perfectly white
sorceress, from the ource of the tream of orrow, on the borders of
hell. or could the sorceresss blood be kept warm enough unless it was
placed in the bottles of wyddolwyn orr, which preserved the heat of
any liuor put into them, though it was carried from the east of the
world to the west. Another set of bottles he must also have to keep milk
for his guests inthose bottles of hinnon hin arnawd in which no
drink ever turned sour. For himself, he reuired the sword of wrnach
the iant, which that personage would never allow out of his own
keeping, because it was destined that he himself should fall by it. Last
of all, he must be given the comb, the razor, and the scissors which lay
between the ears of Twrch Trwyth, a king changed into the most terrible
of wild boars.

It is the chase of this boar which gives the story of ulhwch and
lwen its alternative titleThe Twrch Trwyth. The task was one worthy
of gods and demigods. Its contemplation might well have appalled
ulhwch, who, however, was not so easily frightened. To every fresh
demand, every new obstacle put in his way, he gave the same answer

It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy.

Whether it was easy or not will be seen from the conditions under which
alone the hunt could be brought to a successful end. o ordinary hounds
or huntsmen would avail. The chief of the pack must be rudwyn, the
whelp of reid the son of Eri, led in the one leash that would hold him,
fastened, by the one chain strong enough, to the one collar that would
contain his neck. o huntsman could hunt with this dog except abon son
of odron and he had, ages before, been taken from between his mother
and the wall when he was three nights old, and it was not known where he
was, or even whether he were living or dead. There was only one steed
that could carry abon, namely wynn ygdwn, the horse of weddw. Two
other marvellous hounds, the cubs of ast hymhi, must also be obtained
they must be held in the only leash they would not break, for it would
be made out of the beard of the giant issull, plucked from him while he
was still alive. Even with this, no huntsman could lead them except
ynedyr Wyllt, who was himself nine times more wild than the wildest
beast upon the mountains. All Arthurs mighty men must come to help,
even wyn son of udd, upon his black horse and how could he be spared
from his terrible duty of restraining the devils in hell from breaking
loose and destroying the world

ere is material for romance indeed ut, unhappily, we shall never know
the full story of how all these magic treasures were obtained, all these
magic hounds captured and compelled to hunt, all these magic huntsmen
brought to help. The storywhich r. utt considers to be, saving
the finest tales of the Arabian ights, the greatest romantic fairy
tale the world has ever knownis not, as we have it now, complete. It
reads fully enough but, on casting backwards and forwards, between the
list of feats to be performed and the body of the tale which is supposed
to relate them all, we find many of them wanting. The host of Arthur,
we are told, dispersed themselves into parties of one and two, each
party intent upon some separate uest. The adventures of some of them
have come down, but those of others have not. We are told how ai slew
wrnach the iant with his own sword how wyrthur son of reidawl,
wyns rival for the love of reudylad, saved an anthill from fire, and
how the grateful ants searched for and found the very flaxseeds sown by
awthorn in his youth how Arthurs host surrounded and took ast
hymhis cubs, and how ai and edwyr overcame issull, and plucked out
his beard with wooden tweezers, to make a leash for them. We learn how
Arthur went to Ireland, and brought back the cauldron of iwrnach the
ael, full of Irish money how Whitetusk the oarking was chased and
killed and how Arthur condescended to slay the perfectly black
sorceress with his own hand. That others of the treasures were acuired
is hinted rather than said. ost important of all for so much depended
on him, we find out where the stolen abon was, and learn how he was
rescued.

o many ages had elapsed since abon had disappeared that there seemed
little hope of ever finding news of him. evertheless wrhyr, who spoke
the languages of all creatures, went to enuire of that ancient bird,
the usel of ilgwri. ut the usel, though in her time she had pecked a
smiths anvil down to the size of a nut, was yet too young to have heard
of abon. he sent wrhyr to a creature formed before her, the tag of
edynvre. ut though the tag had lived to see an oaksapling slowly
grow to be a tree with a thousand branches, and as slowly decay again
till it was a withered stump, he had never heard of abon.

Therefore he sent him on to a creature still older than himselfthe wl
of wm awlwyd. The wood she lived in had been thrice rooted up, and had
thrice resown itself, and yet, in all that immense time, she had never
heard of abon. There was but one who might have, she told wrhyr, and
he was the Eagle of wern Abwy.

ere, at last, they struck abons trail. The Eagle said I have been
here for a great space of time, and when I first came hither there was a
rock here, from the top of which I pecked at the stars every evening
and now it is not so much as a span high. From that day to this I have
been here, and I have never heard of the man for whom you inuire,
except once when I went in search of food as far as Llyn Llyw. And when
I came there, I struck my talons into a salmon, thinking he would serve
me as food for a long time. ut he drew me into the deep, and I was
scarcely able to escape from him. After that I went with my whole
kindred to attack him, and to try to destroy him, but he sent
messengers, and made peace with me and came and besought me to take
fifty fish spears out of his back. nless he know something of him whom
you seek, I cannot tell who may. owever, I will guide you to the place
where he is.

It happened that the almon did know. With every tide he went up the
evern as far as the walls of loucester, and there, he said, he had
found such wrong as he had never found anywhere else. o he took ai and
wrhyr upon his shoulders and carried them to the wall of the prison
where a captive was heard lamenting. This was abon son of odron, who
was suffering such imprisonment as not even Lludd of the ilver and or
reid, the son of Eri, the other two of the Three Paramount
Prisoners of ritain, had endured before him. ut it came to an end
now for ai sent to Arthur, and he and his warriors stormed loucester,
and brought abon away.

All was at last ready for the final achievementthe hunting of Twrch
Trwyth, who was now, with his seven young pigs, in Ireland. efore he
was roused, it was thought wise to send the wizard enw to find out by
ocular inspection whether the comb, the scissors, and the razor were
still between his ears. enw took the form of a bird, and settled upon
the oars head. e saw the coveted treasures, and tried to take one of
them, but Twrch Trwyth shook himself so violently that some of the venom
from his bristles spurted over enw, who was never uite well again from
that day.

Then the hunt was up, the men surrounded him, and the dogs were loosed
at him from every side. n the first day, the Irish attacked him. n the
second day, Arthurs household encountered him and were worsted. Then
Arthur himself fought with him for nine days and nine nights without
even killing one of the little pigs.

A truce was now called, so that wrhyr, who spoke all languages, might
go and parley with him. wrhyr begged him to give up in peace the comb,
the scissors, and the razor, which were all that Arthur wanted. ut the
oar Trwyth, indignant of having been so annoyed, would not. n the
contrary, he promised to go on the morrow into Arthurs country, and do
all the harm he could there.

o Twrch Trwyth with his seven pigs crossed the sea into Wales, and
Arthur followed with his warriors in the ship Prydwen. ere the story
becomes wonderfully realistic and circumstantial. We are told of every
place they passed through on the long chase through outh Wales, and can
trace the course of the hunt over the map. We know of every check
the huntsmen had, and what happened every time the boars turned to bay.
The casualtylist of Arthurs men is completely given and we can also
follow the shrinking of Twrch Trwyths herd, as his little pigs fell one
by one. one were left but Trwyth himself by the time the evern estuary
was reached, at the mouth of the Wye.

ere the hunt came up with him, and drove him into the water, and in
this unfamiliar element he was outmatched. sla ignife,
anawyddan son of Llyr, acmwri, the servant of Arthur, and wyngelli
caught him by his four feet and plunged his head under water, while the
two chief huntsmen, abon son of odron, and yledyr Willt, came, one on
each side of him, and took the scissors and the razor. efore they could
get the comb, however, he shook himself free, and struck out for
ornwall, leaving sla and acmwri halfdrowned in the evern.

And all this trouble, we are told, was mere play compared with the
trouble they had with him in ornwall before they could get the comb.
ut, at last, they secured it, and drove the boar out over the deep sea.
e passed out of sight, with two of the magic hounds in pursuit of him,
and none of them have ever been heard of since.

The sight of these treasures, paraded before awthorn, chief of giants,
was, of course, his deathwarrant. All who wished him ill came to gloat
over his downfall. ut they should have been put to shame by the giant,
whose end had, at least, a certain dignity. y daughter, he said to
ulhwch, is yours, but you need not thank me for it, but Arthur, who
has accomplished all this. y my free will you should never have had
her, for with her I lose my life.

Thereupon they cut off his head, and put it upon a pole and that night
the undutiful lwen became ulhwchs bride.



Footnote 

  istory of the ritons,  .

Footnote 

  eoffrey of onmouth. ooks I and , and chaps. I and II of I.

Footnote 

  Translated by Lady uest in her abinogion.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IFinn and the Fenians.

Footnote 

  hap. IIIThe aelic Argonauts.

Footnote 

  The list will be found, translated from an old Welsh ., in the notes
  to ulhwch and lwen, in Lady uests abinogion.

Footnote 

  hap. IIIThe aelic Argonauts.

Footnote 

  Pronounced eelhookh.

Footnote 

  The following pages sketch out the main incidents of the story as
  translated by Lady uest in her abinogion.

Footnote 

  In Welsh, Yspaddaden Penkawr.

Footnote 

  I.e. he of the White Track. The beauty of lwen was proverbial in
  medival Welsh poetry.

Footnote 

  In his notes to his edition of Lady uests abinogion. Published
  .

Footnote 

  o says the text. ut a triad uoted by Lady uest in her notes gives
  the Three Paramount Prisoners of ritain differently. The three
  supreme prisoners of the Island of ritain, Llyr Llediath in the
  prison of Euroswydd Wledig, and adoc, or abon, and weir, son of
  weiryoth and one more exalted than the three, and that was Arthur,
  who was for three nights in the astle of eth and Anoeth, and three
  nights in the prison of Wen Pendragon, and three nights in the dark
  prison under the stone. And one youth released him from these three
  prisons that youth was oreu the son of ustennin, his cousin.

Footnote 

  ee hys eltic Folklore, chap. Placename tories.

Footnote 

  The big knife was, we are told in the story, a short broad dagger.
  When Arthur and his hosts came before a torrent, they would seek for a
  narrow place where they might pass the water, and would lay the
  sheathed dagger across the torrent, and it would form a bridge
  sufficient for the armies of the three islands of ritain, and of the
  three islands adacent, with their spoil.






                             APTE III

                   TE  A I AT IT


It is not, however, by such fragments of legend that Arthur is best
known to English readers. ot Arthur the god, but Arthur the blameless
king, who founded the Table ound, from which he sent forth his knights
to ride abroad redressing human wrongs, is the figure which the
name conures up. or is it even from ir Thomas alorys orte arthur
that this conception comes to most of us, but from Tennysons Idylls of
the ing. ut Tennyson has so modernized the ancient tradition that it
retains little of the old Arthur but the name. e tells us himself that
his poem had but very slight relation to

                 ... that gray king, whose name, a ghost,
         treams like a cloud, manshaped, from mountainpeak,
         And cleaves to cairn and cromlech still or him
         f eoffreys book, or him of alleors ...

but that he merely used the legend to give a substantial form to his
ideal figure of the perfect English gentlemana title to which the
original Arthur could scarcely have laid claim. till less does there
remain in it the least trace of anything that could suggest mythology.

As much as this, however, might be said of alorys book. We may be
fairly certain that the good ir Thomas had no idea that the personages
of whom he wrote had ever been anything different from the hristian
knights which they had become in the late French romances from which he
compiled his own fifteenthcentury work. The old gods had been, from
time to time, very completely euhemerized. The characters of the Four
ranches of the abinogi are still recognizable as divine beings. In
the later Welsh stories, however, their divinity merely hangs about them
in shreds and tatters, and the first orman adapters of these stories
made them still more definitely human. y the time alory came to build
up his orte arthur from the foreign romances, they had altered so much
that the shapes and deeds of gods could only be recognized under their
medival knightly disguises by those who had known them in their ancient
forms.

We have chosen alorys orte arthur, as almost the sole representative
of Arthurian literature later than the Welsh poems and prose stories,
for three reasons. Firstly, because it is the English Arthurian romance
par excellence from which all later English authors, including
Tennyson, have drawn their material. econdly, because the mass of
foreign literature dealing with the subect of Arthur is in itself a
lifestudy, and could not by any possibility be compressed within the
limits of a chapter. Thirdly, because alorys fine udgment caused him
to choose the best and most typical foreign tales to weave into his own
romance and hence it is that we find most of our old ritish godsboth
those of the earlier cycle and those of the system connected with
Arthurstriding disguised through his pages.

uriously enough, ir Edward trachey, in his preface to the lobe
edition of axtons orte arthur, uses almost the same image to
describe alorys prosepoem that atthew Arnold handled with such
effect, in his tudy of eltic Literature, to point out the real
nature of the abinogion. alory, he says, has built a great,
rambling, medival castle, the walls of which enclose rude and even
ruinous work of earlier times. ow rude and how ruinous these relics
were alory doubtless had not the least idea, for he has completely
umbled the ancient mythology. ot only do gods of the older and newer
order appear together, but the same deities, under very often only
slightly varying names, come up again and again as totally different
characters.

Take, for example, the ancient deity of death and ades. As ing
randegore, or randegoris rn of ower, he brings five thousand
mounted men to oppose ing Arthur but, as ir randel, or
randiles rn of wales, he is a valiant night of the ound
Table, who dies fighting in Arthurs service. Again, under his name
of ther Pendragon ther en, he is Arthurs father though as
ing an of enwyk the uare Enclosure, doubtless the same as
Taliesins aer Pedryvan and alorys arbonek, he is a foreign
monarch, who is Arthurs ally. Yet again, as the father of
uinevere, gyrvran has become Leodegrance. As ing riens, or
rience, of ore ower, he marries one of Arthurs sisters,
fights against him, but finally tenders his submission, and is enrolled
among his knights. rien may also be identified in the orte
arthur as ing ience, or yons, of orth Wales, and as ing
entres of arloth while, to crown the varied disguises of this
Proteus of ritish gods, he appears in an isolated episode as alan, who
fights with his brother alin until they kill one another.

ne may generally tell the divinities of the underworld in these
romances by their connection, not with the settled and civilized parts
of England, but with the wild and remote north and west, and the still
wilder and remoter islands. ust as rn and rien are kings of ower,
so Arawn, under the corruptions of his name into Anguish and
Anguissance, is made ing of cotland or Ireland, both countries
having been probably confounded, as the same land of the cotti, or
aels. Pwyll, ead of Annwn, we likewise discover under two
disguises. As Pelles, ing of the Foreign ountry and eeper of
the oly rail, he is a personage of great mythological significance,
albeit the real nature of him and his surroundings has been overlaid
with a hristian veneer as foreign to the original of Pelles as his own
kingdom was to Arthurs knights. The hief of ades figures as a cousin
nigh unto oseph of Arimathie, who, while he might ride supported
much hristendom, and holy church. e is represented as the father
of Elayne Elen, whom he gives in marriage to ir Launcelot,
bestowing upon the couple a residence called astle liant, the
name of which, there is good evidence to show, is connected with that of
Pwylls vassal called Teirnyon Twryf liant in the first of the
abinogi. nder his other name of ir Pelleasthe hero of
Tennysons Idyll of Pelleas and Ettarrethe primitive myth of Pwyll is
touched at a different point. After his unfortunate lovepassage with
Ettarre or Ettard, as alory calls her, Pelleas is represented as
marrying imue, whose original name, which was hiannon, reached
this form, as well as that of ivien, through a series of miscopyings
of successive scribes.

With Pelles, or Pelleas, is associated a ing Pellean, or Pellam, his
son, and, eually with him, the eeper of the rail, who can be no other
than Pryderi. Like that deity in the abinogi of th, he is
defeated by one of the gods of light. The dealer of the blow, however,
is not Arthur, as successor to wydion, but alin, the alloritish
sungod elinus.

Another dark deity, wyn son of udd, we discover under all of his three
titles. alled variously ir winas, ir uynas, and ir
wenbaus by alory, the Welsh wynwas or wyn is altogether on
Arthurs side. The ornish elwas, split into two different knights,
divides his allegiance. As ir elias, or eleaus, de Lile
of the Isle, he is a night of the ound Table, though, on the
uarrel between Arthur and Launcelot, he sides with the knight against
the king. ut as ir eliagraunce, or eliagaunce, it is he who, as in
the older myth, captures ueen uinevere and carries her off to his
castle. nder his omerset name of Avallon, or Avallach, he is
connected with the episode of the rail. ing Evelake is a aracen
ruler who was converted by oseph of Arimathea, and brought by him to
ritain. In his converts enthusiasm, he attempted the uest of the holy
vessel, but was not allowed to succeed. As a consolation, however,
it was divinely promised him that he should not die until he had seen a
knight of his blood in the ninth degree who should achieve it. This was
done by ir Percivale, ing Evelake being then three hundred years
old.

Turning from deities of darkness to deities of light, we find the
skygod figuring largely in the orte arthur. The Lludd of the earlier
mythology is alorys ing Loth, or Lot, of rkney, through an
intrigue with whose wife Arthur becomes the father of ir ordred. Lots
wife was the mother also of ir awain, whose birth alory does not,
however, attribute to Arthur, though such must have been the original
form of the myth. ir awain, of the Arthurian legend, is the
walchmei of the Welsh stories, the successor of the still earlier Lleu
Llaw yffes, ust as ir ordredthe Welsh edrawtcorresponds to Lleus
brother ylan. As ir ordred retains the dark character of edrawt, so
ir awain, even in alory, shows the attributes of a solar deity.
We are told that his strength increased gradually from dawn till high
noon, and then as gradually decreased againa piece of pagan symbolism
which forms a good example of the appositeness of ir Edward tracheys
figure for it stands out of the medival narrative like an ancient
brick in some more modern building.

The eus of the later cycle, Emrys or yrddin, appears in the orte
arthur under both his names. The word Emrys becomes ors, and ing
ors of aul is made a brother of ing an of enwyckthat is, rn
of the uare Enclosure, the ubiuitous underworld god. yrddin we meet
under no such disguise. The everpopular erlin still retains intact the
attributes of the skygod. e remains above, and apart from all the
knights, higher even in some respects than ing Arthur, to whom he
stands in much the same position as th does to wydion in the
abinogi. Like th, he is an enchanter, and, like th, too, who
could hear everything said in the world, in however low a tone, if only
the wind met it, he is practically omniscient. The account of his final
disappearance, as told in the orte arthur, is only a reembellishment
of the original story, the naturemyth giving place to what novelists
call a feminine interest. Everyone knows how the great magician fell
into a dotage upon the lady of the lake whom alory calls imue, and
Tennyson ivienboth names being that of hiannon in disguise.
erlin would let her have no rest, but always he would be with her ...
and she was ever passing weary of him, and fain would have been
delivered of him, for she was afeard of him because he was a devils
son, and she could not put him away by no means. And so on a time it
happed that erlin showed to her in a rock whereas was a great wonder,
and wrought by enchantment, that went under a great stone. o, by her
subtle working, she made erlin to go under that stone to let her wit of
the marvels there, but she wrought so there for him that he never came
out for all the craft that he could do. And so she departed and left
erlin.

erlins living grave is still to be seen at the end of the al des
Fes, in the forest of rcilien, in rittany. The tomb of stone is
certainly but a prosaic euivalent for the tower of woven air in which
the heavengod went to his rest. till, it is not uite so unpoetic as
the leather sack in which hiannon, the original of imue, caught and
imprisoned wawl, the earlier erlin, like a badger in a bag.

Elen, yrddins consort, appears in alory as five different Elaines.
Two of them are wives of the dark god, under his names of ing
an and ing entres. A third is called the daughter of
ing Pellinore, a character of uncertain origin. ut the two most
famous are the ladies who loved ir LauncelotElaine the Fair, Elaine
the lovable, Elaine the lily maid of Astolat, and the luckier and
less scrupulous Elaine, daughter of ing Pelles, and mother of ir
Launcelots son, alahad.

ut it is time, now that the most important figures of ritish mythology
have been shown under their knightly disguises, and their place in
Arthurian legend indicated, to pass on to some account of the real
subectmatter of ir Thomas alorys romance. Externally, it is the
history of an Arthur, ing of ritain, whom most people of alorys time
considered as eminently a historical character. Around this central
narrative of Arthurs reign and deeds are grouped, in the form of
episodes, the personal exploits of the knights believed to have
supported him by forming a kind of household guard. ut, with the
exception of a little magnified and distorted legendary history, the
whole cycle of romance may be ultimately resolved into a few myths, not
only retold, but recombined in several forms by their various tellers.
The orman adapters of the atire de retagne found the ritish
mythology already in process of transformation, some of the gods having
dwindled into human warriors, and others into hardly less human druids
and magicians. nder their hands the ritish warriors became orman
knights, who did their deeds of prowess in the tiltyard, and found
their inspiration in the fantastic chivalry popularized by the
Trouveres, while the druids put off their still somewhat barbaric
druidism for the more conventional magic of the Latin races. ore than
this, as soon as the real seuence and raison dtre of the tales had
been lost sight of, their adapters used a free hand in reweaving them.
ost of the romancers had their favourite characters whom they made the
central figure in their stories. ir awain, ir Percival, ir Tristrem,
and ir wain all of them probably once local ritish sungods appear
as the most important personages of the romances called after their
names, stories of the doughty deeds of christened knights who had little
left about them either of riton or of pagan.

It is only the labours of the modern scholar that can bring back to us,
at this late date, things long forgotten when alorys book was issued
from axtons press. ut oblivion is not annihilation, and Professor
hys points out to us the old myths lying embedded in their later
setting with almost the same certainty with which the geologist can show
us the fossils in the rock. Thus treated, they resolve themselves
into three principal motifs, prominent everywhere in eltic mythology
the birth of the sungod the struggle between light and darkness and
the raiding of the underworld by friendly gods for the good of man.

The first has been already dealt with. It is the retelling of the
story of the origin of the sungod in the abinogi of th, son of
thonwy. For wydion we now have Arthur instead of Arianrod, the wife
of the superannuated skygod wyvre, we find the wife of ing Lot, the
superannuated skygod Lludd Lleu Llaw yffes rises again as ir awain
walchmei, and ylan as ir ordred edrawt while the wise erlin,
the upiter of the new system, takes the place of his wise prototype,
th. onnected with this first myth is the secondthe struggle between
light and darkness, of which there are several versions in the orte
arthur. The leading one is the rebellion of the evillydisposed ir
ordred against Arthur and ir awain while, on other stages, alanthe
dark god rnfights with alinthe sungod elinus and the same alin,
or elinus, gives an almost mortal stroke to Pellam, the Pryderi of the
older mythology.

The same myth has also a wider form, in which the battle is waged for
possession of a maiden. Thus to seek no other instances wynhwyvar was
contended for by Arthur and edrawt, or, in an earlier form of the myth,
by Arthur and wyn. In the orte arthur, wyn, under the corruption of
his ornish name elwas into ir eliagraunce, still captures
uinevere, but it is no longer Arthur who rescues her. That task, or
privilege, has fallen to a new champion. It is ir Launcelot who follows
ir eliagraunce, defeats and slays him, and rescues the fair
captive. ut ir Launcelot, it must be statedprobably to the
surprise of those to whom the Arthurian story without Launcelot and
ueen uinevere must seem almost like the play of amlet with amlet
left out,is unknown to the original tradition. Welsh song and story
are silent with regard to him, and he is not improbably a creation of
some orman romancer who calmly appropriated to his heros credit deeds
earlier told of other knights.

ut the romantic treatment of these two myths by the adapters of the
atire de retagne are of smaller interest to us at the present day
than that of the third. The attraction of the Arthurian story lies less
in the battles of Arthur or the loves of uinevere than in the legend
that has given it its lasting popularitythe hristian romance of the
uest of the oly rail. o great and various has been the inspiration
of this legend to noble works both of art and literature that it seems
almost a kind of sacrilege to trace it back, like all the rest of
Arthurs story, to a paganism which could not have even understood, much
less created, its mystical beauty. one the less is the whole story
directly evolved from primitive pagan myths concerning a miraculous
cauldron of fertility and inspiration.

In the later romances, the oly rail is a hristian relic of marvellous
potency. It had held the Paschal lamb eaten at the Last upper
and, after the death of hrist, oseph of Arimathea had filled it with
the aviours blood. ut before it received this colouring, it had
been the magic cauldron of all the eltic mythologiesthe agdas
ndry which fed all who came to it, and from which none went away
unsatisfied rns cauldron of enovation, which brought the dead
back to life the cauldron of gyrvran the iant, from which the
uses ascended the cauldrons captured by uchulainn from the ing
of the hadowy ity, and by Arthur from the chief of ades as
well as several other mythic vessels of less note.

In its transition from pagan to hristian form, hardly one of the
features of the ancient myth has been really obscured. We may recount
the chief attributes, as Taliesin tells them in his poiling of Annwn,
of the cauldron captured by Arthur. It was the property of Pwyll, and of
his son Pryderi, who lived in a kingdom of the other world called, among
other titles, the evolving astle, the Fourcornered astle, the
astle of evelry, the ingly astle, the lass astle, and the
astle of iches. This place was surrounded by the sea, and in other
ways made difficult of access there was no lack of wine there, and its
happy inhabitants spent with music and feasting an existence which
neither disease nor old age could assail. As for the cauldron, it had a
rim of pearls around its edge the fire beneath it was kept fanned by
the breaths of nine maidens it spoke, doubtless in words of prophetic
wisdom and it would not cook the food of a perurer or coward.
ere we have considerable data on which to base a parallel between the
pagan cauldron and the hristian rail.

or have we far to go in search of correspondences, for they are nearly
all preserved in alorys romance. The mystic vessel was kept by ing
Pelles, who is Pwyll, in a castle called arbonek, a name which
resolves itself, in the hands of the philologist, into aer bannawg,
the suare or fourcornered castlein other words, the aer
Pedryvan of Taliesins poem. f the character of the place as a
astle of iches and a astle of evelry, where bright wine was the
drink of the host, we have more than a hint in the account, twice
given, of how, upon the appearance of the railborne, it should be
noticed, by a maiden or angelthe hall was filled with good odours, and
every knight found on the table all the kinds of meat and drink he could
imagine as most desirable. It could not be seen by sinners, a
hristian refinement of the savage idea of a pot that would not cook a
cowards food but the sight of it alone would cure of wounds and
sickness those who approached it faithfully and humbly, and in its
presence neither old age nor sickness could oppress them. And,
though in alory we find no reference either to the spot having been
surrounded by water, or to the castle as a revolving one, we have only
to turn from the orte arthur to the romance entitled the eint real
to discover both. walchmei, going to the castle of ing Peleur
Pryderi, finds it encircled by a great water, while Peredur,
approaching the same place, sees it turning with greater speed than the
swiftest wind. oreover, archers on the walls shoot so vigorously that
no armour can resist their shafts, which explains how it happened that,
of those that went with Arthur, except seven, none returned from aer
idi.

It is noticeable that Arthur himself never attempts the uest of the
rail, though it was he who had achieved its pagan original. We find in
alory four competitors for the mantle of Arthurir Pelleas, ir
ors, ir Percivale, and ir alahad. The first of these may be put
out of court at once, ir Pelleas, who, being himself Pelles, or Pwyll,
the keeper of it, could have had no reason for such exertions. At the
second we may look doubtfully for ir ors is no other than Emrys, or
yrddin, and, casting back to the earlier ritish mythology, we do
not find the skygod personally active in securing boons by force or
craft from the underworld. The other two have better claimsir
Percivale and ir alahad. ir Percivale is the ormanFrench name for
Peredur, the hero of a story in the ed ook of ergest which
gives the oldest form of a rail uest we have. It is anterior to the
orman romances, and forms almost a connectinglink between tales of
mythology and of chivalry. Peredur, or ir Percivale, therefore, is the
oldest, most primitive, of rail seekers. n the other hand, ir alahad
is the latest and youngest. ut there is reason to believe that alahad,
in Welsh walchaved, the Falcon of ummer, is the same solar hero as
awain, in Welsh walchmei, the Falcon of ay. oth are made,
in the story of ulhwch and lwen, sons of the same mother, wyar. ir
awain himself is, in one Arthurian romance, the achiever of the
rail. It is needless to attempt to choose between these two. oth
have the attributes of sungods. walchmei, the successor of Lleu Llaw
yffes, and Peredur Paladrhir, that is to say, the pearman with the
Long haft, may be allowed to claim eual honours. What is
important is that the uest of the rail, once the chief treasure of
ades, is still accomplished by one who takes in later legend the place
of Lieu Llaw yffes and Lugh Lamhfada in the earlier ritish and aelic
myths as a longarmed solar deity victorious in his strife against the
Powers of arkness.



Footnote 

  Tennysons Idylls of the ing uinevere.

Footnote 

  Ibid. To the ueen.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. .

Footnote 

  resholm Island, the scene of The Entertaining of the oble ead.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook , chap. III.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. III.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. III.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook II, chap. III.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook , chap. II ook III, chap. I ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook II, chap. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook II, chap. .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. III.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p.  and note.

Footnote 

  The subect is treated at length by Professor hys in his Arthurian
  Legend, chap. IIPwyll and Pelles.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook II, chap. .

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook III, chap. II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook III, chap. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  p. cit., pp. .

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. III.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. III.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IIThe Adventures of the ods of ades.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook III, chap. .

Footnote 

  Whose story is told by Tennyson in the Idylls, and by alory in ook
  III of the orte arthur.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chaps. II and III.

Footnote 

  ee his tudies in the Arthurian Legend.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe ythological oming of Arthur.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chaps. II.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook II, chap. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook II, chap. I ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  ee chap. The ods of the aels.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IIIThe Wooing of ranwen and the eheading of rn.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IThe ythological oming of Arthur.

Footnote 

  ee chap. IIThe Irish Iliad.

Footnote 

  hap. IThe ythological oming of Arthur.

Footnote 

  hap. IThe ythological oming of Arthur.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chaps. II and I.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. I ook II, chap. I ook III, chap.
  III.

Footnote 

  ot mentioned by alory, but stated in the romance called eint
  real.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, pp.  .

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook II, chap. , in which ir ors, ir Percivale, and
  ir alahad are all fed from the angreal.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  Translated by Lady uest in her abinogion, under the title of
  Peredur, the on of Evrawc.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. . ut see whole of chap. IIIalahad
  and walchaved.

Footnote 

  The erman romance iu rne, by einrich von dem Trlin.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, p. .






                              APTE I

                    TE ELIE A FALL F TE 


If there be love of fame in celestial minds, those gods might count
themselves fortunate who shared in the transformation of Arthur. Their
divinity had fallen from them, but in their new rles, as heroes of
romance, they entered upon vivid reincarnations. The names of Arthurs
nights might almost be described as household words, while the gods
who had no portion in the Table ound are known only to those who busy
themselves with antiuarian lore. It is true that a few folktales still
survive in the remoter parts of Wales, in which the names of such
ancient ritish deities as wydion, wyn, Arianrod, and ylan appear,
but it is in such a chaos of umbled and distorted legend that one finds
it hard to pick out even the slenderest thread of story. They have none
of the definite coherence of the contemporary aelic folktales uoted
in a previous chapter as still preserving the myths about oibniu, Lugh,
ian, anannn, Ethniu, and alor. Indeed, they have reached such a
stage of disintegration that they can hardly now survive another
generation.

There have been, however, other paths by which the fame of a god might
descend to a posterity which would no longer credit his divinity. The
rolls of early ritish history were open to welcome any number of
mythical personages, provided that their legends were attractive.
eoffrey of onmouths famous istoria ritonum is, under its grave
pretence of exact history, as mythological as the orte arthur, or even
the abinogion. The annals of early ritish saintship were not less
accommodating. A god whose tradition was too potent to be ignored or
extinguished was canonized, as a matter of course, by clerics who held
as an axiom that the toleration of the cromlech facilitated the
reception of the ospel. nly the most irreconcilable escaped
themsuch a one as wyn son of udd, who, found almost useless by
eoffrey and intractable by the monkish writers, remains the last
survivor of the old godsdwindled to the proportions of a fairy, but
unsubdued.

This part of resistance is perhaps the most dignified for deities can
be sadly changed by the caprices of their euhemerizers. n, whom we
knew as the mother of the heaven gods, seems strangely described as a
king of Lochlin and ublin, who led the Irish into north Wales in A..
. ore recognizable is his son wydion, who introduced the
knowledge of letters into the country of his adoption. The dynasty of
ing n, according to a manuscript in the collection of r. Edward
Williamsbetter known under his bardic name of Iolo organwgheld north
Wales for a hundred and twentynine years, when the orth ritish king,
unedda, invaded the country, defeated the Irish in a great battle, and
drove them across sea to the Isle of an. This battle is historical,
and, putting n and wydion out of the uestion, probably represented
the last stand of the ael, in the extreme west of ritain, against the
second and stronger wave of eltic invasion. In the same collection of
Iolo anuscripts is found a curious, and even comic, euhemeristic
version of the strange myth of the one Prison of eth and Anoeth which
anawyddan son of Llyr, built in ower. The new reading makes that
ghastly abode a real building, constructed out of the bones of the
aesarians omans killed in battle with the ymri. It consisted of
numerous chambers, some of large bones and some of small, some above
ground and some under. Prisoners of war were placed in the more
comfortable cells, the underground dungeons being kept for traitors to
their country. everal times the aesarians demolished the prison,
but, each time, the ymri rebuilt it stronger than before. At last,
however, the bones decayed, and, being spread upon the ground, made an
excellent manure From that time forth the people of the neighbourhood
had astonishing crops of wheat and barley and of every other grain for
many years.

It is not, however, in these, so to speak, unauthorized narratives that
we can best refind our ritish deities, but in the compact, coherent,
and at times almost convincing istoria ritonum of eoffrey of
onmouth, published in the first half of the twelfth century, and for
hundreds of years gravely uoted as the leading authority on the early
history of our islands. The modern critical spirit has, of course,
relegated it to the region of fable. We can no longer accept the
pleasant tradition of the descent of the ritons from the survivors of
Troy, led westward in search of a new home by rutus, the greatgrandson
of the pious neas. or indeed does any portion of the istory, from
neas to Athelstan, uite persuade the latterday reader. Its kings
succeed one another in plausible seuence, but they themselves are too
obviously the heroes of popular legend.

A large part of eoffreys chronicletwo books out of twelveis, of
course, devoted to Arthur. In it he tells the story of that paladins
conuests, not only in his own country, against the axons, the Irish,
the cots, and the Picts, but over all western Europe. We see the
ritish champion, after annexing Ireland, Iceland, othland, and the
rkneys, following up these minor victories by subduing orway, acia
by which enmark seems to have been meant, Auitaine, and aul. After
such triumphs there was clearly nothing left for him but the overthrow
of the oman empire and this he had practically achieved when the
rebellion of ordred brought him home to his death, or rather for even
eoffrey does not uite lose hold of the belief in the undying Arthur
to be carried to the island of Avallon to be healed of his wounds, the
crown of ritain falling to his kinsman onstantine, the son of ador,
uke of ornwall, in the five hundred and fortysecond year of our
Lords incarnation. pon the more personal incidents connected
with Arthur, eoffrey openly professes to keep silence, possibly
regarding them as not falling within the province of his history, but we
are told shortly how ordred took advantage of Arthurs absence on the
ontinent to seize the throne, marry uanhamara uinevere, and ally
himself with the axons, only to be defeated at that fatal battle called
by eoffrey ambula, in which ordred, Arthur, and Walganthe ir
awain of alory and the walchmei of the earlier legendsall met their
dooms.

We find the gods of the older generation standing in the same position
with regard to Arthur in eoffreys istory as they do in the later
Welsh triads and tales. Though rulers, they are yet his vassals. In
three brothers of royal blood, called Lot, rian, and Augusel, who are
represented as having been chiefs in the north, we may discern Lludd,
rien, and Arawn. To these three Arthur restored the rights of their
ancestors, handing over the semisovereignty of cotland to Augusel,
giving rian the government of urief oray, and reestablishing Lot
in the consulship of Loudonesia Lothian, and the other provinces
belonging to him. Two other rulers subect to him are unvasius,
ing of the rkneys, and alvasius, ing of Iceland, in whom we
recognize wyn, under Latinized forms of his Welsh name wynwas and his
ornish name elwas. ut it is characteristic of eoffrey of onmouths
loose hold upon his materials that, not content with having connected
several of these gods with Arthurs period, he further endows them with
reigns of their own. rien was Arthurs vassal, but rianus was
himself ing of ritain centuries before Arthur was born. Lud that
is, Lludd succeeded his father eli. We hear nothing of his silver
hand, but we learn that he was famous for the building of cities, and
for rebuilding the walls of Trinovantum, which he also surrounded
with innumerable towers ... and though he had many other cities, yet he
loved this above them all, and resided in it the greater part of the
year for which reason it was afterwards called aerlud, and by the
corruption of the word, aerlondon and again by change of languages, in
process of time, London as also by foreigners who arrived here, and
reduced this country under their subection, it was called Londres. At
last, when he was dead, his body was buried by the gate which to this
time is called in the ritish tongue after his name Parthlud, and in the
axon, Ludesgata. e was succeeded by his brother, assibellawn
assivelaunus, during whose reign ulius aesar first invaded ritain.

Lludd, however, is not entirely dependent upon eoffrey of onmouth for
his reputation as a king of ritain. ne of the old Welsh romances,
translated by Lady harlotte uest in her abinogion, relates the
rebuilding of London by Lludd in almost the same words as eoffrey. The
story which these pseudohistorical details introduce is, however, an
obviously mythological one. It tells us how, in the days of Lludd,
ritain was oppressed by three plagues. The first was the arrival of a
strange race of sorcerers called the oranians, who had three
ualities which made them unpopular they paid their way in fairy
money, which, though apparently real, returned afterwardslike the
shields, horses, and hounds made by wydion son of n, to deceive
Pryderiinto the fungus out of which it had been charmed by magic they
could hear everything that was said over the whole of ritain, in
however low a tone, provided only that the wind met it and they could
not be inured by any weapon. The second was a shriek that came on
every ay eve, over every hearth in the Island of ritain, and went
through peoples hearts and so scared them that the men lost their hue
and their strength, and the women their children, and the young men and
the maidens their senses, and all the animals and trees and the earth
and the waters were left barren. The third was a disappearance of the
food hoarded in the kings palace, which was so complete that a years
provisions vanished in a single night, and so mysterious that no one
could ever find out its cause.

y the advice of his nobles, Lludd went to France to obtain the help of
its king, his brother Llevelys, who was a man great of counsel and
wisdom. In order to be able to consult with his brother without being
overheard by the oranians, Llevelys caused a long tube of brass to be
made, through which they talked to one another. The sorcerer tribe,
however, got to know of it, and, though they could not hear what was
being said inside the speakingtube, they sent a demon into it, who
whispered insulting messages up and down it, as though from one brother
to the other. ut Lludd and Llevelys knew one another too well to be
deceived by this, and they drove the demon out of the tube by flooding
it with wine. Then Llevelys told Lludd to take certain insects, which he
would give him, and pound them in water. When the water was sufficiently
permeated with their essence, he was to call both his own people and the
oranians together, as though for a conference, and, in the midst of the
meeting, to cast it over all of them alike. The water, though harmless
to his own people, would nevertheless prove a deadly poison to the
oranians.

As for the shriek, Llevelys explained it to be raised by a dragon. This
monster was the ed ragon of ritain, and it raised the shriek because
it was being attacked by the White ragon of the axons, which was
trying to overcome and destroy it. The French king told his brother to
measure the length and breadth of ritain, and, when he had found the
exact centre of the island, to cause a pit to be dug there. In this pit
was to be placed a vessel containing the best mead that could be made,
with a covering of satin over it to hide it. Lludd was then to watch
from some safe place. The dragons would appear and fight in the air
until they were exhausted, then they would fall together on to the top
of the satin cloth, and so draw it down with them into the vessel full
of mead. aturally they would drink the mead, and, eually naturally,
they would then sleep. As soon as Lludd was sure that they were
helpless, he was to go to the pit, wrap the satin cloth round both of
them, and bury them together in a stone coffin in the strongest place in
ritain. If this were safely done, there would be no more heard of the
shriek.

And the disappearance of the food was caused by a mighty man of magic,
who put everyone to sleep by charms before he removed the kings
provisions. Lludd was to watch for him, sitting by the side of a
cauldron full of cold water. As often as he felt the approach of
drowsiness, he was to plunge into the cauldron. Thus he would be able to
keep awake and frustrate the thief.

o Lludd came back to ritain. e pounded the insects in the water, and
then summoned both the men of ritain and the oranians to a meeting. In
the midst of it, he sprinkled the water over everyone alike. The natives
took no harm from this mythological beetle powder, but the oranians
died.

Lludd was then ready to deal with the dragons. is careful measurements
proved that the centre of the island of ritain was at xford, and there
he caused the pit to be dug, with the vessel of mead in it, hidden by
the satin covering. aving made everything ready, he watched, and soon
saw the dragons appear. For a long time they fought desperately in the
air then they fell down together on to the satin cloth, and, drawing it
after them, subsided into the mead. Lludd waited till they were uite
silent, and then pulled them out, folded them carefully in the wrapping,
and took them to the district of nowdon, where he buried them in the
strong fortress whose remains, near eddgelert, are still called inas
Emrys. After this the terrible shriek was not heard again until erlin
had them dug up, five hundred years later, when they recommenced
fighting, and the red dragon drove the white one out of ritain.

Last of all, Lludd prepared a great banuet in his hall, and watched
over it, armed, with the cauldron of water near him. In the middle of
the night, he heard soft, drowsy music, such as nearly put him to sleep
but he kept awake by repeatedly dipping himself in the cold water. ust
before dawn a huge man, clad in armour, came into the hall, carrying a
basket, which he began to load with the viands on the table. Like the
bag in which Pwyll captured wawl, its holding capacity seemed endless.
owever, the man filled it at last, and was carrying it out, when Lludd
stopped him. They fought, and Lludd conuered the man of magic, and made
him his vassal. Thus the Three Plagues of ritain came to an end.

Lludd, in changing from god to king, seems to have lost most of his old
mythological attributes. Even his daughter reudylad is taken from him
and given to another of the ancient ritish deities. Why Lludd, the
skygod, should have been confounded with Llyr, the seagod, is not very
apparent, but it is certain that reudylad of the early Welsh legends
and poems is the same as eoffreys ordeilla and hakespeares
ordelia. The great dramatist was ultimately indebted to the eltic
mythology for the groundwork of the legend which he wove into the tragic
story of ing Lear. Leir, as eoffrey calls him, was the son of
ladud, who built aer adus ath, and perished, like Icarus, as the
result of an accident with a flyingmachine of his own invention. aving
no sons, but three daughters, onorilla, egan, and ordeilla, he
thought in his old age of dividing his kingdom among them. ut, first of
all, he decided to make trial of their affection for him, with the idea
of giving the best portions of his realm to the most worthy. onorilla,
the eldest, replied to his uestion of how much she loved him, that she
called heaven to witness, she loved him more than her own soul. egan
answered with an oath, that she could not otherwise express her
thoughts, but that she loved him above all creatures. ut when it came
to ordeillas turn, the youngest daughter, disgusted with her sisters
hypocrisy, spoke after a uite different fashion. y father, said
she, is there any daughter that can love her father more than duty
reuires In my opinion, whoever pretends to it, must disguise her real
sentiments under the veil of flattery. I have always loved you as a
father, nor do I yet depart from my purposed duty and if you insist to
have something more extorted from me, hear now the greatness of my
affection, which I always bear you, and take this for a short answer to
all your uestions look how much you have, so much is your value, and
so much do I love you. er enraged father immediately bestowed his
kingdom upon his two other daughters, marrying them to the two highest
of his nobility, onorilla to aglaunus, uke of Albania, and egan
to enuinus, uke of ornwall. To ordeilla he not only refused a share
in his realm, but even a dowry. Aganippus, ing of the Franks, married
her, however, for her beauty alone.

nce in possession, Leirs two sonsinlaw rebelled against him, and
deprived him of all regal authority. The sole recompense for his lost
power was an agreement by aglaunus to allow him maintenance, with a
bodyguard of sixty soldiers. ut, after two years, the uke of Albania,
at his wife onorillas instigation, reduced them to thirty. esenting
this, Leir left aglaunus, and went to enuinus, the husband of egan.
The uke of ornwall at first received him honourably, but, before a
year was out, compelled him to discharge all his attendants except five.
This sent him back in a rage to his eldest daughter, who, this time,
swore that he should not stay with her, unless he would be satisfied
with one servingman only. In despair, Leir resolved to throw himself
upon the mercy of ordeilla, and, full of contrition for the way he had
treated her, and of misgivings as to how he might be received, took ship
for aul.

Arriving at aritia, he sent a messenger to his daughter, telling
her of his plight and asking for her help. ordeilla sent him money,
robes, and a retinue of forty men, and, as soon as he was fully euipped
with the state suitable to a king, he was received in pomp by Aganippus
and his ministers, who gave the government of aul into his hands until
his own kingdom could be restored to him. This the king of the Franks
did by raising an army and invading ritain. aglaunus and enuinus were
routed, and Leir replaced on the throne, after which he lived three
years. ordeilla, succeeding to the government of ritain, buried her
father in a certain vault, which she ordered to be made for him under
the iver ore, in Leicester Llyrcestre, and which had been built
originally under the ground to the honour of the god anus. And here all
the workmen of the city, upon the anniversary solemnity of that
festival, used to begin their yearly labours.

Exactly what myth is retold in this history of Leir and his three
daughters we are hardly likely ever to discover. ut its mythological
nature is clear enough in the light of the description of the
underground temple dedicated to Llyr, at once the god of the subaueous,
and therefore subterranean, world and a ritish is Pater, connected
with the origin of things, like the oman god anus, with whom he was
apparently identified.

Ten kings or so after this for any more exact way of measuring the
flight of time is absent from eoffreys istory we recognize two
other ritish gods upon the scene. rennius that is, rn disputes the
kingdom with his brother elinus. learly this is a version of the
ancient myth of the twin brothers, arkness and Light, which we have
seen expressed in so many ways in eltic mythology. rn, the god of
death and the underworld, is opposed to elinus, god of the sun and
health. In the original, lost myth, probably they alternately conuered
and were conuereda symbol of the alternation of night and day and of
winter and summer. In eoffreys istory, they divided ritain,
elinus taking the crown of the island with the dominions of Loegria,
ambria, and ornwall, because, according to the Troan constitution,
the right of inheritance would come to him as the elder, while
rennius, as the younger, had orthumberland, which extended from the
iver umber to aithness. ut flatterers persuaded rennius to ally
himself with the ing of the orwegians, and attack elinus. A battle
was fought, in which elinus was conueror, and rennius escaped to
aul, where he married the daughter of the uke of the Allobroges, and
on that rulers death was declared successor to the throne. Thus firmly
established with an army, he invaded ritain again. elinus marched with
the whole strength of the kingdom to meet him, and the armies were
already drawn out opposite to one another in battle array when onwenna,
the mother of the two kings, succeeded in reconciling them. ot having
one another to fight with, the brothers now agreed upon a oint
expedition with their armies into aul. The ritons and the Allobroges
conuered all the other kings of the Franks, and then entered Italy,
destroying villages and cities as they marched to ome. abius and
Porsena, the oman consuls, bought them off with large presents of gold
and silver and the promise of a yearly tribute, whereupon rennius and
elinus withdrew their army into ermany and began to devastate it. ut
the omans, now no longer taken by surprise and unprepared, came to the
help of the ermans. This brought rennius and elinus back to ome,
which, after a long siege, they succeeded in taking. rennius remained
in Italy, where he exercised unheardof tyranny over the people and
one may take the whole of this veracious history to be due to a
patriotic desire to make out the rennus of ae ictis famewho
actually did sack ome, in .. a riton. elinus, the other
brother, returned to England. e made a gate of wonderful structure in
Trinovantum, upon the bank of the Thames, which the citizens call after
his name illingsgate to this day. ver it he built a prodigiously large
tower, and under it a haven or uay for ships.... At last, when he had
finished his days, his body was burned, and the ashes put up in a golden
urn, which they placed at Trinovantum, with wonderful art, on the top of
the tower above mentioned. e was succeeded by urgiunt rabtruc,
who, as he was returning by way of the rkneys from a raid on the anes,
met the ships of Partholon and his people as they came from pain to
settle in Ireland.

Llyr and his children, large as they bulk in mythical history, were
hardly less illustrious as saints. The family of Llyr Llediath is always
described by the early Welsh hagiologists as the first of the Three
chief oly Families of the Isle of ritain. The glory of Llyr himself,
however, is but a reflected one for it was his son rn the lessd
who actually introduced hristianity into ritain. Legend tells us that
he was taken captive to ome with his son aradawc who was identified
for the purpose with the historical aratacus, and the rest of his
family, and remained there seven years, during which time he became
converted to the ospel, and spread it enthusiastically on his return.
either his son aradawc nor his halfbrother anawyddan exactly
followed in his footsteps, but their descendants did. aradawcs sons
were all saintly, while his daughter Eigen, who married a chief called
arrlog, lord of aer arrlog ld arum, was the first female saint in
ritain. anawyddans side of the family was less adaptable. is son and
his grandson were both pagans, but his greatgrandson obtained hristian
fame as t. yfan, who was sent as a bishop to Wales by Pope
Eleutherius, and was martyred at erthyr yvan. After this, the saintly
line of Llyr increases and flourishes. ingularly inappropriate persons
are found in itabon, the alloritish Apollo, as well as eraint and
others of ing Arthurs court.

It is so uaint a conceit that hristianity should have been, like
all other things, the gift of the eltic ades, that it seems almost
a pity to cast doubt on it. The witness of the classical historians
sums up, however, dead in its disfavour. Tacitus carefully
enumerates the family of aratacus, and describes how he and his
wife, daughter, and brother were separately interviewed by the
Emperor laudius, but makes no mention at all of the chieftains
supposed father rn. oreover, io assius gives the name of
aratacuss father as unobelinushakespeares ymbelinewho, he
adds, had died before the omans first invaded ritain. The evidence
is wholly against rn as a hristian pioneer. e remains the grim
old god of war and death, blessd only to his pagan votaries, and
especially to the bards, who probably first called him endigeid
ran, and whose stubborn adherence must have been the cause of the
not less stubborn efforts of their enemies, the hristian clerics,
to bring him over to their own side by canonization.

They had an easier task with rns sister, ranwen of the Fair osom.
oddesses, indeed, seem to have stood the process better than
godswitness aint rigit, the ary of the ael. The ritish
Aphrodit became, under the name of rynwyn, or wynwen, a patron saint
of lovers. As late as the fourteenth century, her shrine at Llandwynwyn,
in Anglesey, was the favourite resort of the disappointed of both sexes,
who came to pray to her image for either success or forgetfulness. To
make the result the more certain, the monks of the church sold Lethean
draughts from her sacred well. The legend told of her is that, having
vowed herself to perpetual celibacy, she fell in love with a young chief
called aelon. ne night, as she was praying for guidance in her
difficulty, she had a vision in which she was offered a goblet of
delicious liuor as a draught of oblivion, and she also saw the same
sweet medicine given to aelon, whom it at once froze into a block of
ice. he was then, for her faith, offered the granting of three boons.
The first she chose was that aelon might be allowed to resume his
natural form and temperature the second, that she should no longer
desire to be married and the third, that her intercessions might be
granted for all truehearted lovers, so that they should either wed the
obects of their affection or be cured of their passion. From this
cause came the virtues of her shrine and fountain. ut the modern
generation no longer flocks there, and the efficacious well is choked
with sand. one the less, she whom the Welsh bards called the aint of
Love still has her occasional votaries. ountry girls of the
neighbourhood seek her help when all else fails. The water nearest to
the church is thought to be the best substitute for the now dry and
ruined original well.

A striking contrast to this easy victory over paganism is the stubborn
resistance to hristian adoption of wyn son of udd. It is true that he
was once enrolled by some monk in the train of the lessd rn,
but it was done in so halfhearted a way that, even now, one can discern
that the writer felt almost ashamed of himself. is fame as at least a
powerful fairy was too vital to be thus tampered with. Even penser,
though, in his Faerie ueene, he calls him the good ir uyon ... in
whom great rule of Tempraunce goodly doth appeare, does not
attempt to conceal his real nature. It is no man, but

                  an Elfin born, of noble state
              And mickle worship in his native land,

who sets forth the beauties of that virtue for which the original eltic
paradise, with its unfailing ale and rivers of mead and wine, would
hardly seem to have been the best possible school. ave for penser, all
authorities agree in making wyn the determined opponent of things
hristian. A curious and picturesue legend is told of him in
connection with t. ollen, who was himself the greatgrandson of rns
son, aradawc. The saint, desirous of still further retirement from the
world, had made himself a cell beneath a rock near lastonbury Tor, in
wyns own island of Avilion. It was close to a road, and one day he
heard two men pass by talking about wyn son of udd, and declaring him
to be ing of Annwn and the fairies. t. ollen put his head out of the
cell, and told them to hold their tongues, and that wyn and his fairies
were only demons. The two men retorted by warning the saint that he
would soon have to meet the dark ruler face to face. They passed on, and
not long afterwards t. ollen heard someone knocking at his door. n
asking who was there, he got the answer I am here, the messenger of
wyn ap udd, ing of ades, to bid thee come by the middle of the day
to speak with him on the top of the hill. The saint did not go and the
messenger came a second time with the same message. n the third visit,
he added a threat that, if t. ollen did not come now, it would be the
worse for him. o, a little disuieted, he went, but not unarmed. e
consecrated some water, and took it with him.

n other days the top of lastonbury Tor had always been bare, but on
this occasion the saint found it crowned by a splendid castle. en and
maidens, beautifully dressed, were going in and out. A page received him
and told him that the king was waiting for him to be his guest at
dinner. t. ollen found wyn sitting on a golden chair in front of a
table covered with the rarest dainties and wines. e invited him to
share them, adding that if there was anything he especially liked, it
should be brought to him with all honour. I do not eat the leaves of
trees, replied the saint, who knew what fairy meats and drinks were
made of. ot taken aback by this discourteous answer, the ing of Annwn
genially asked the saint if he did not admire his servants livery,
which was a motley costume, red on one side and blue on the other.
Their dress is good enough for its kind, said t. ollen. What kind
is that asked wyn. The red shows which side is being scorched, and
the blue shows which side is being frozen, replied the saint, and,
splashing his holy water all round him, he saw castle, servingmen, and
king vanish, leaving him alone on the bare, windy hilltop.

wyn, last of the gods of Annwn, has evidently by this time taken over
the functions of all the others. e has the hounds which Arawn once
hadthe wn Annwn, dogs of hell, with the white bodies and the red
ears. We hear more of them in folklore than we do of their master,
though even their tradition is dying out with the spread of newspapers
and railways. We are not likely to find another everend Edmund
ones to insist upon belief in them, lest, by closing our minds to
such manifest witnesses of the supernatural world, we should become
infidels. till, we may even now find peasants ready to swear that they
have heard them sweeping along the hillsides upon stormy nights, as
they pursued the flying souls of unshriven men or unbaptized babes. The
tales told of them agree curiously. Their cry is like that of a pack of
foxhounds, but softer in tone. The nearer they are to a man, the less
loud their voices seem, and the farther off they are, the louder. ut
they are less often seen than heard, and it has been suggested that the
sounds were the cries of migrating beangeese, which are not unlike
those of hounds in chase. The superstition is widely spread. The wn
Annwn of Wales are called in orth evon the Yeth eath or eathen,
or Yell ounds, and on artmoor, the Wish ounds. In urham and
Yorkshire they are called abriel ounds, and they are known by
various names in orfolk, loucestershire, and ornwall. In cotland it
is Arthur who leads the Wild unt, and the tradition is found over
almost the whole of western Europe.

ot many folktales have been preserved in which wyn is mentioned by
name. is memory has lingered longest and latest in the fairyhaunted
ale of eath, so close to his ridge, the Taw abode ... not the
nearest Taw ... but that Taw which is the farthest. ut it may be
understood whenever the king of the fairies is mentioned. As the last of
the greater gods of the old mythology, he has been endowed by popular
fancy with the rule of all the varied fairy population of ritain, so
far, at least, as it is of eltic or preeltic origin. For some of the
fairies most famous in English literature are Teutonic. ing beron
derives his name, through the French fabliaux, from Elberich, the
dwarf king of the iebelungenlied, though his ueen, Titania, was
probably named out of vids etamorphoses. Puck, another of
hakespeares fays, is merely the personification of his race, the
pwccas of Wales, pookas of Ireland, poakes of Worcestershire, and
pixies of the West of England. It is Wales that at the present
time preserves the most numerous and diverse collection of fairies. ome
of them are beautiful, some hideous some kindly, some malevolent. There
are the gentle damsels of the lakes and streams called wragedd Annwn,
and the fierce and cruel mountain fairies known as the wyllion. There
are the household sprites called wbachod, like the cotch and English
brownies the oblynau, or gnomes of the mines called knockers in
ornwall and the Ellyllon, or elves, of whom the pwccas are a
branch. In the orth of England the spirits belong more wholly to
the lower type. The bogles, brownies, killmoulis, redcaps, and their
like seem little akin to the higher, Aryanseeming fairies. The Welsh
bwbach, too, is described as brown and hairy, and the coblynau as black
or copperfaced. We shall hardly do wrong in regarding such spectres as
the degraded gods of a preAryan race, like the Irish leprechauns and
pookas, who have nothing in common with the still beautiful, still noble
figures of the Tuatha  anann.

f these numberless and nameless subects of wyn, some dwell beneath
the earth or under the surface of lakeswhich seem to take, in Wales,
the place of the aelic fairy hillsand others in Avilion, a
mysterious western isle of all delights lying on or ust beneath the
sea. Pembrokeshirethe ancient yfedhas kept the tradition most
completely. The story goes that there is a certain suare yard in the
hundred of emmes in that county which holds the secret of the fairy
realm. If a man happens to set his feet on it by chance, his eyes are
opened, and he can see that which is hidden from other menthe fairy
country and commonwealth,but, the moment he moves from the enchanted
spot, he loses the vision, and he can never find the same place
again. That country is upon the sea, and not far from shore like
the Irish paradise of which it is the counterpart, it may sometimes be
sighted by sailors. The reen eadows of Enchantment are still an
article of faith among Pembrokeshire and aermarthenshire sailors, and
evidently not without some reason. In  a correspondent of the
Pembroke ounty uardian sent in a report made to him by a certain
aptain ohn Evans to the effect that, one summer morning, while
trending up the hannel, and passing resholm Island the scene of the
entertaining of rns head, in what he had always known as deep water,
he was surprised to see to windward of him a large tract of land covered
with a beautiful green meadow. It was not, however, above water, but two
or three feet below it, so that the grass waved or swam about as the
ripple floated over it, in a way that made one who watched it feel
drowsy. aptain Evans had often heard of the tradition of the fairy
island from old people, but admitted that he had never hoped to see it
with his own eyes. As with the ounds of Annwn one may suspect a
uite natural explanation. irage is at once common enough and rare
enough on our coasts to give rise to such a legend, and it must have
been some such phenomenon as the Fata organa of icily which has made
sober men swear so confidently to ocular evidence of the eltic
Paradise, whether seen from the farthest western coasts of aelic
Ireland or cotland, or of ritish Wales.



Footnote 

  ee, for example, a folktale, pp.  in hyss eltic
  Folklore.

Footnote 

  tephenss Preliminary issertation to his translation of Aneurins
  ododin.

Footnote 

  Iolo ., p. .

Footnote 

  Iolo ., pp. .

Footnote 

  istoria ritonum, ooks I, , and chaps. I and II of I.

Footnote 

  istoria ritonum, ook I, chap. II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook I, chap. II. They appear also as uanius, ing of
  the uns, and elga, ing of the Picts, in ook , chap. I.

Footnote 

  istoria ritonum, ook III, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook III, chap. .

Footnote 

  I.e. London, under its traditionary earlier name, Troa ova, given
  it by rutus.

Footnote 

  The tory of Lludd and Llevelys.

Footnote 

  The name means dwarfs. hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  istoria ritonum, ook II, chap, I.

Footnote 

  Alba, or orth ritain.

Footnote 

  ow alais.

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, pp. .

Footnote 

  istoria ritonum, ook III, chaps. I.

Footnote 

  The same fabulous personage, perhaps, as the original of abelais
  argantua, a popular eltic god.

Footnote 

  istoria ritonum, ook III, haps. III.

Footnote 

  ee the Iolo . The genealogies and families of the saints of the
  island of ritain. opied by Iolo organwg in  from the Long ook
  of Thomas Truman of Pantlliwydd in the parish of Llansanor in
  lamorgan, p. , c. Also see An Essay on the Welsh aints by the
  ev. ice ees, ections I and .

Footnote 

  hys Arthurian Legend, pp. .

Footnote 

  Iolo ., p. .

Footnote 

  The Welsh bards call wynwen the goddess, or saint of love and
  affection, as the poets designate enus. Iolo .

Footnote 

  Wirt ikes ritish oblins, p. .

Footnote 

  Iolo ., p. .

Footnote 

  The Faerie ueene, Prologue to ook II.

Footnote 

  Ibid., ook II, canto I, verse .

Footnote 

  Published in Y real London, , and is to be found uoted in
  hys Arthurian Legend, pp. ,  also in ikes ritish
  oblins, pp. .

Footnote 

  A elation of Apparitions of pirits in the ounty of onmouth and
  the Principality of Wales. Published at ewport, .

Footnote 

  Thistleton yer Folklore of hakespeare, p. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  Wirt ikes ritish oblins, p. .

Footnote 

  The rython, ol. I, p. .

Footnote 

  hys eltic Folklore, pp. .






                        IAL F TE ELTI
                                PAAI






                              APTE 

              IAL F TE ELTI PAAI IT E
                                 TIE


The fall of the eltic state worship began earlier in ritain than in
her sister island. either was it hristianity that struck the first
blow, but the rough humanity and stern ustice of the omans. That
people was more tolerant, perhaps, than any the world has ever known
towards the religions of others, and gladly welcomed the eltic godsas
godsinto its own diverse Pantheon. A friendly aulish or ritish
divinity might at any time be granted the sotospeak divine oman
citizenship, and be assimilated to upiter, to ars, to Apollo, or to
any other properly accredited deity whom the omans deemed him to
resemble. It was not against the god, but against his worship at the
hands of his priests, that oman law struck. The colossal human
sacrifices of the druids horrified even a people who were far from
sueamish about a little bloodshed. They themselves had abolished such
practices by a decree of the senate before aesar first invaded
ritain, and could not therefore permit within their empire a cult
which slaughtered men in order to draw omens from their
deathagonies. ruidism was first reuired to be renounced by those
who claimed oman citizenship then it was vigorously put down among the
less civilized tribes. Tacitus tells us how the Island of ona
Angleseythe great stronghold of druidismwas attacked, its sacred
groves cut down, its altars laid level, and its priests put to the
sword. Pliny, recording how the Emperor Tiberius had suppressed
the druids, congratulates his fellowcountrymen on having put an end,
wherever their dominion extended, to the monstrous customs inspired by
the doctrine that the gods could take pleasure in murder and
cannibalism. The practice of druidism, with its attendant
barbarities, abolished in ritain wherever the long oman arm could
reach to strike, took refuge beyond the orthern Wall, among the savage
aledonian tribes who had not yet submitted to the invaders yoke.
aturally, too, it remained untouched in Ireland. ut before the omans
left ritain, it had been extirpated everywhere, except among the Picts
and cots.

hristianity, following the oman rule, completed the ruin of paganism
in ritain, so far, at least, as its public manifestations were
concerned. In the sixth century of our era, the monkish writer, ildas,
is able to refer complacently to the ancient ritish religion as a dead
faith. I shall not, he says, enumerate those diabolical idols of my
country, which almost surpassed in number those of Egypt, and of which
we still see some mouldering away within or without the deserted
temples, with stiff and deformed features as was customary. or will I
cry out upon the mountains, fountains, or hills, or upon the rivers,
which now are subservient to the use of men, but once were an
abomination and destruction to them, and to which the blind people paid
divine honour. And with the idols fell the priests. The very word
druid became obsolete, and is scarcely mentioned in the earliest
ritish literature, though druids are prominent characters in the Irish
writings of the same period.

The secular arm had no power in cotland and in Ireland, conseuently
the battle between Paganism and hristianity was fought upon more eual
terms, and lasted longer. In the first country, aint olumba, and in
the second, aint Patrick are the personages who, at any rate according
to tradition, beat down the druids and their gods. Adamnan, Abbot of
Iona, who wrote his ita olumb in the last decade of the seventh
century, describes how, a century earlier, that saint had carried the
ospel to the Picts. Their king, rude, received him contemptuously, and
the royal druids left no heathen spell unuttered to thwart and annoy
him. ut, as the power of oses was greater than the power of the
magicians of Egypt, so aint olumbas prayers caused miracles more
wonderful and more convincing than any wrought by his adversaries. uch
stories belong to the atmosphere of myth which has always enveloped
heroic men the essential fact is that the Picts abandoned the old
religion for the new.

A similar legend sums up the lifework of aint Patrick in Ireland.
efore he came, romm ruaich had received from time immemorial his
yearly toll of human lives. ut aint Patrick faced the gruesome idol
as he raised his crozier, we are told, the demon fell shrieking from his
image, which, deprived of its soul, bowed forward to the ground.

It is far easier, however, to overthrow the more public manifestations
of a creed than to destroy its inner vital force. romm ruaichs idol
might fall, but his spirit would survivea very Proteus. The sacred
places of the ancient eltic religion might be invaded, the idols and
altars of the gods thrown down, the priests slain, scattered, or
banished, and the cult officially declared to be extinct but, driven
from the important centres, it would yet survive outside and around
them. The more civilized aels and ritons would no doubt accept the
purer gospel, and abandon the gods they had once adored, but the
peasantrythe bulk of the populationwould still cling to the familiar
rites and names. A nobler belief and a higher civilization come, after
all, only as surface waves upon the great ocean of human life beneath
their agitations lies a vast slumbering abyss of halfconscious faith
and thought to which culture penetrates with difficulty and in which
changes come very slowly.

We have already shown how long and how faithfully the aelic and Welsh
peasants clung to their old gods, in spite of all the efforts of the
clerics to explain them as ancient kings, to transform them into
wonderworking saints, or to ban them as demons of hell. This
conservative religious instinct of the agricultural populations is not
confined to the inhabitants of the ritish Islands. The modern reeks
still believe in nereids, in lamias, in sirens, and in haron, the dark
ferryman of ades. The descendants of the omans and Etruscans hold
that the old Etruscan gods and the oman deities of the woods and fields
still live in the world as spirits. The high altars of the Lord of
the ound and his terrible kin were levelled, and their golden images
and great temples left to moulder in abandonment but the rude rustic
shrine to the rude rustic god still received its offerings. It is this
shifting of the care of the pagan cult from chief to peasant, from court
to hovel, and, perhaps, to some extent from higher to lower race, that
serves to explain how the more primitive and uncouth gods have tended so
largely to supplant those of higher, more graceful mien. Aboriginal
deities, thrust into obscurity by the invasion of higher foreign types,
came back to their own again.

For it seems plain that we must divide the spiritual population of the
ritish Islands into two classes. There is little in common between the
fairy, strictly socalled, and the unsightly elf who appears under
various names and guises, as pooka, leprechaun, brownie, knocker, or
bogle. The one belongs to such divine tribes as the Tuatha  anann of
aelic myth or their kin, the ritish gods of the abinogion. The other
owes his origin to a uite different, and much lower, kind of
imagination. ne might fancy that neolithic man made him in his own
image.

one the less has immemorial tradition wonderfully preserved the
essential features of the eltic naturegods. The fairy belief of the
present day hardly differs at all from the conception which the elts
had of their deities. The description of the Tuatha  anann in the
ialogue of the Elders as sprites or fairies with corporeal or
material forms but indued with immortality would stand as an account of
prevailing ideas as to the good people today. or do the Irish and
Welsh fairies of popular belief differ from one another. oth alike live
among the hills, though in Wales a lake often takes the place of the
fairy mound both, though they war and marry among themselves, are
semiimmortal both covet the children of men, and will steal them from
the cradle, leaving one of their own uncanny brood in the mortal babys
stead both can lay men and women under spells both delight in music
and the dance, and live lives of unreal and fantastic splendour and
luxury. Another point in which they resemble one another is in their
tiny size. ut this would seem to be the result of the literary
convention originated by hakespeare in genuine folktales, both aelic
and ritish, the fairies are pictured as of at least mortal
stature.

ut, Aryan or Iberian, beautiful or hideous, they are fast vanishing
from belief. Every year, the secluded valleys in which men and women
might still live in the old way, and dream the old dreams, tend more and
more to be thrown open to the modern world of rapid movement and rapid
thought. The last ten years have perhaps done more in this direction
than the preceding ten generations. What lone shepherd or fisherman will
ever see again the vision of the great anannn ave the stableboys of
today still any faith left in Finvarra Is wyn ap udd often thought
of in his own valleys of the Taw and the edd It would be hard,
perhaps, to find a wholehearted believer even in his local pooka or
parish bogle.

It is the ritual observances of the old eltic faith which have better
weathered, and will longer survive, the disintegrating influences of
time. There are no hard names to be remembered. Things may still be done
for luck which were once done for religion. ustomary observances die
very slowly, held up by an only half acknowledged fear that, unless they
are fulfilled, something may happen. We shall get, therefore, more
satisfactory evidence of the nature of the eltic paganism by examining
such customs than in any other way.

We find three forms of the survival of the ancient religion into uite
recent times. The first is the celebration of the old solar or
agricultural festivals of the spring and autumn euinoxes and of the
summer and winter solstices. The second is the practice of a symbolic
human sacrifice by those who have forgotten its meaning, and only know
that they are keeping up an old custom, oined with late instances of
the actual sacrifices of animals to avert cattleplagues or to change
bad luck. The third consists of many stillliving relics of the once
universal worship of sacred waters, trees, stones, and animals.

Whatever may have been the exact meaning of the eltic state worship,
there seems to be no doubt that it centred around the four great days in
the year which chronicle the rise, progress, and decline of the sun,
and, therefore, of the fruits of the earth. These were eltaine, which
fell at the beginning of ay idsummer ay, marking the triumph of
sunshine and vegetation the Feast of Lugh, when, in August, the
turningpoint of the suns course had been reached and the sad amhain,
when he bade farewell to power, and fell again for half a year under the
sway of the evil forces of winter and darkness.

f these great solar periods, the first and the last were, naturally,
the most important. The whole eltic mythology seems to revolve upon
them, as upon pivots. It was on the day of eltaine that Partholon and
his people, the discoverers, and, indeed, the makers of Ireland, arrived
there from the other world, and it was on the same day, three hundred
years later, that they returned whence they came. It was on eltaineday
that the aelic gods, the Tuatha  anann, and, after them, the aelic
men, first set foot on Irish soil. It was on the day of amhain that the
Fomors oppressed the people of emed with their terrible tax and it was
again at amhain that a later race of gods of light and life finally
conuered those demons at the attle of oytura. nly one important
mythological incidentand that was one added at a later timehappened
upon any other than one of those two days it was upon idsummer ay,
one of the lesser solar points, that the people of the goddess anu took
Ireland from its inhabitants, the Fir olgs.

The mythology of ritain preserves the same rootidea as that of
Ireland. If anything uncanny took place, it was sure to be on ayday.
It was on the night of the first of ay that hiannon lost, and
Teirnyon Twryf liant found, the infant Pryderi, as told in the first of
the abinogion. It was on every ayeve that the two dragons
fought and shrieked in the reign of ing Lludd. It is on every
first of ay till the day of doom that wyn son of udd, fights with
wyrthur son of reidawl, for Lludds fair daughter, reudylad. And
it was when she was amaying in the woods and fields near Westminster
that the same wyn, or elwas, under his romancename of ir
eliagraunce, captured Arthurs ueen, uinevere.

The nature of the rites performed upon these days can be surmised from
their pale survivals. They are still celebrated by the descendants of
the elts, though it is probable that few of them knowor would even
care to knowwhy ay ay, t. ohns ay, Lammas, and alloween are
times of ceremony. The firstcalled eltaine in Ireland, ealtiunn
in cotland, henn da oaldyn in the Isle of an, and alanai the
alends of ay in Walescelebrates the waking of the earth from her
winter sleep, and the renewal of warmth, life, and vegetation. This is
the meaning of the aypole, now rarely seen in our streets, though
hakespeare tells us that in his time the festival was so eagerly
anticipated that no one could sleep upon its eve. At midnight the
people rose, and, going to the nearest woods, tore down branches of
trees, with which the sun, when he rose, would find doors and windows
decked for him. They spent the day in dancing round the aypole, with
rude, rustic mirth, man oining with nature to celebrate the coming of
summer. The opposite to it was the day called amhain in Ireland and
cotland, auin in an, and os alangaeof the ight of the Winter
alends in Wales. This festival was a sad one summer was over, and
winter, with its short, sunless days and long, dreary nights, was at
hand. It was the beginning, too, of the ancient eltic year, and
omens for the future might be extorted from dark powers by uncanny
rites. It was the holiday of the dead and of all the more evil
supernatural beings. n ovembereve, says a orth ardiganshire
proverb, there is a bogy on every stile. The cotch have even invented
a special bogythe amhanach or goblin which comes out at
amhain.

The sungod himself is said to have instituted the August festival
called Lugnassad Lughs commemoration in Ireland, Lla Lluanys in
an, and wyl Awst August Feast in Wales and it was once of hardly
less importance than eltaine or amhain. It is noteworthy, too, that
the first of August was a great day at Lyonsformerly called Lugudunum,
the dn town of Lugus. The midsummer festival, on the other hand,
has largely merged its mythological significance in the hristian Feast
of t. ohn.

The characteristic features of these festivals give certain proof of
the original nature of the great pagan ceremonials of which they are
the survivals and travesties. In all of them, bonfires are
lighted on the highest hills, and the hearth fires solemnly rekindled.
They form the excuse for much sport and ollity. ut there is yet
something sinister in the air the fairies are active and abroad,
and one must be careful to omit no prescribed rite, if one would avoid
kindling their anger or falling into their power. To some of these
stillhalfbelievedin naturegods offerings were made down to a
comparatively late period. When Pennant wrote, in the eighteenth
century, it was the custom on eltaineday in many ighland villages
to offer libations and cakes not only to the spirits who were
believed to be beneficial to the flocks and herds, but also to
creatures like the fox, the eagle, and the hoodiecrow which so often
molested them. At alloween the eltic amhain the natives of
the ebrides used to pour libations of ale to a marine god called
hony, imploring him to send seaweed to the shore. In honour,
also, of such beings, curious rites were performed. aidens washed
their faces in morning dew, with prayers for beauty. They carried
sprigs of the rowan, that mystic tree whose scarlet berries were the
ambrosial food of the Tuatha  anann.

In their original form, these now harmless rural holidays were
undoubtedly religious festivals of an orgiastic natureworship such as
became so popular in reece in connection with the cult of ionysus. The
great lords of life and of the powers of nature that made and ruled
life were propitiated by maddening invocations, by riotous dances, and
by human sacrifice.

The bonfires which fill so large a part in the modern festivals have
been casually mentioned. riginally they were no mere feux de oie,
but had a terrible meaning, which the customs connected with them
preserve. At the ighland eltaine, a cake was divided by lot, and
whoever drew the burnt piece was obliged to leap three times over the
flames. At the midsummer bonfires in Ireland all passed through the
fire the men when the flames were highest, the women when they were
lower, and the cattle when there was nothing left but smoke. In Wales,
upon the last day of ctober, the old amhain, there was a slightly
different, and still more suggestive rite. The hilltop bonfires were
watched until they were announced to be extinct. Then all would race
headlong down the hill, shouting a formula to the effect that the devil
would get the hindmost. The devil of a new belief is the god of the one
it has supplanted in all three instances, the custom was no mere
meaningless horseplay, but a symbolical human sacrifice.

A similar observance, but of a more cruel kind, was kept up in France
upon t. ohns ay, until forbidden by law in the reign of Louis the
Fourteenth. askets containing living wolves, foxes, and cats were
burned upon the bonfires, under the auspices and in the presence of the
sheriffs or the mayor of the town. aesar noted the custom among
the druids of constructing huge wickerwork images, which they filled
with living men, and set on fire, and it can hardly be doubted that the
wretched wolves, foxes, and cats were ceremonial substitutes for human
beings.

An ingenious theory was invented, after the introduction of
hristianity, with the purpose of allowing such ancient rites to
continue, with a changed meaning. The passing of persons and cattle
through flame or smoke was explained as a practice which interposed a
magic protection between them and the powers of evil. This homopathic
device of using the evil powers own sacred fire as a means of
protection against himself somewhat suggests that seething of the kid in
its mothers milk which was reprobated by the Levitical law but, no
doubt, pagan demons were considered fair game. The explanation, of
course, is an obviously and clumsily forced one it was the grim
druidical philosophy thatto uote aesarunless the life of man was
repaid for the life of man, the will of the immortal gods could not be
appeased that dictated both the national and the private human
sacrifices of the elts, the shadows of which remain in the leaping
through the bonfires, and in the numerous recorded sacrifices of cattle
within uite recent times.

r. Laurence omme, in his Ethnology in Folklore, has collected many
modern instances of the sacrifices of cattle not only in Ireland and
cotland, but also in Wales, Yorkshire, orthamptonshire, ornwall, and
the Isle of an. Within twenty miles of the metropolis of cotland
a relative of Professor impson offered up a live cow as a sacrifice to
the spirit of the murrain. In Wales, when cattlesickness broke
out, a bullock was immolated by being thrown down from the top of a high
rock. enerally, however, the wretched victims were burned alive. In
 an Isle of an farmer offered a heifer as a burnt offering near
Tynwald ill, to avert the anger of the ghostly occupant of a barrow
which had been desecrated by opening. ometimes, even, these burnt
oblations were offered to an alleged hristian saint. The registers of
the Presbytery of ingwall for the years  and  contain records
of the sacrifices of cattle upon the site of an ancient temple in honour
of a being whom some called t. ourie, and others, perhaps knowing
his doubtful character, ane god ourie. At irkcudbright, it was
t. uthbert, and at lynnog, in Wales, it was t. euno, who was
thought to delight in the blood of bulls.

uch sacrifices of cattle appear mainly to have been offered to stay
plague among cattle. an for man and beast for beast, was, perhaps, the
old rule. ut among all nations, human sacrifices have been gradually
commuted for those of animals. The family of the erlebys in
allyvorney, ounty ork, used in olden days to keep an idol, an image
of wood about two feet high, carved and painted like a woman. he
was the goddess of smallpox, and to her a sheep was immolated on behalf
of anyone seized with that disease.

The third form of eltic pagan survival is found in numerous instances
of the adoration of water, trees, stones, and animals. Like the other
Aryan nations, the elts worshipped their rivers. The ee received
divine honours as a wargoddess with the title of Aerfon, while the
ibble, under its name of elisama, was identified by the omans with
inerva. yths were told of them, as of the sacred streams of
reece. The ee gave oracles as to the results of the perpetual wars
between the Welsh and the English as its stream encroached either upon
the Welsh or the English side, so one nation or the other would be
victorious. The Tweed, like many of the reek rivers, was credited
with human descendants. That the rivers of reat ritain received
human sacrifices is clear from the folklore concerning many of them.
eprived of their expected offerings, they are believed to snatch by
stealth the human lives for which they crave. iver of art, iver of
art, every year thou claimest a heart, runs the evonshire folksong.
The pey, too, reuires a life yearly, but the pirit of the ibble
is satisfied with one victim at the end of every seven years.

Evidence, however, of the worship of rivers is scanty compared with that
of the adoration of wells. In the case of wellworship, says r.
omme, it may be asserted with some confidence that it prevails in
every county of the three kingdoms. e finds it most vital in the
aelic counties, somewhat less so in the ritish, and almost entirely
wanting in the Teutonic southeast. o numerous, indeed, are holy
wells that several monographs have been written solely upon them.
In some cases these wells were resorted to for the cure of diseases in
others, to obtain change of weather, or good luck. fferings were made
to them, to propitiate their guardian gods or nymphs. Pennant tells us
that in olden times the rich would sacrifice one of their horses at a
well near Abergeleu, to secure a blessing upon the rest. Fowls were
offered at t. Teglas Well, near Wrexham, by epileptic patients.
ut of late years the wellspirits have had to be content with much
smaller tributessuch trifles as pins, rags, coloured pebbles, and small
coins.

With sacred wells were often connected sacred trees, to whose branches
rags and small pieces of garments were suspended by their humble
votaries. ometimes, where the ground near the well was bare of
vegetation, bushes were artificially placed beside the water. The same
people who venerated wells and trees would pay eual adoration to sacred
stones. Lord oden, describing, in , the Island of Inniskea, off the
coast of ayo, asserts that a sacred well called errivla and a sacred
stone called eevougi, which was kept carefully wrapped up in flannel
and brought out at certain periods to be publicly adored, seemed to be
the only deities known to that lone Atlantic islands three hundred
inhabitants. It sounds incredible but there is ample evidence of
the worship of fetish stones by uite modern inhabitants of our islands.
The lan hattan kept such a stone in the Isle of Arran it was
believed, like the stone of Inniskea, to be able to cure diseases, and
was kept carefully wrapped up in fair linen cloth, and about that there
was a piece of woollen cloth. imilarly, too, the worship of wells
was connected with the worship of animals. At a well in the evils
auseway, between uckley and Acton, in hropshire, lived, and perhaps
still live, four frogs who were, and perhaps still are, believed to be
the devil and his impsthat is to say, gods or demons of a proscribed
idolatry. In Ireland such guardian spirits are usually fishtrout,
eels, or salmon thought to be endowed with eternal life. The genius
of a well in anffshire took the form of a fly, which was also said to
be undying, but to transmigrate from body to body. Its function was to
deliver oracles according as it seemed active or lethargic, its
votaries drew their omens. It is needless to multiply instances of
a still surviving cult of water, trees, stones, and animals. Enough to
say that it would be easy. What concerns us is that we are face to face
in ritain with living forms of the oldest, lowest, most primitive
religion in the worldone which would seem to have been once universal,
and which, crouching close to the earth, lets other creeds blow over it
without effacing it, and outlives one and all of them.

It underlies the three great worldreligions, and still forms the real
belief of perhaps the maority of their titular adherents. It is
characteristic of the wisdom of the hristian hurch that, knowing its
power, she sought rather to sanctify than to extirpate it. What once
were the eltic euivalents of the reek fountains of the nymphs were
consecrated as holy wells. The process of so adopting them began
early. t. olumba, when he went in the sixth century to convert the
Picts, found a spring which they worshipped as a god he blessed it, and
from that day the demon separated from the water. Indeed, he so
sanctified no less than three hundred such springs. acred stones
were eually taken under the gis of hristianity. ome were placed on
the altars of cathedrals, others built into consecrated walls. The
animal gods either found themselves the heroes of hristian legends, or
where, for some reason, such adoption was hopeless, were proclaimed
witches animals, and dealt with accordingly. uch happened to the
hare, a creature sacred to the ancient ritons, but now in bad
odour among the superstitious. The wren, too, is hunted to death upon
t. tephens ay in Ireland. Its crime is said to be that it has a
drop of the deils blood in it, but the real reason is probably to be
found in the fact that the Irish druids used to draw auguries from its
chirpings.

                                              

We have made in this volume some attempt to draw a picture of the
ancient religion of our earliest ancestors, the aelic and the ritish
elts. We have shown what can be gathered of the broken remnants of a
mythology as splendid in conception and as brilliant in colour as that
of the reeks. We have tried to paint its divine figures, and to retell
their heroic stories. We have seen them fall from their shrines, and
yet, rising again, take on new lives as kings, or saints, or knights of
romance, and we have caught fading glimpses of them surviving today as
the fairies, their rites still cherished by worshippers who hardly
know who or why they worship. f necessity this survey has been brief
and incomplete. Whether the great edifice of the eltic mythology will
ever be wholly restored one can at present only speculate. Its colossal
fragments are perhaps too deeply buried and too widely scattered. ut,
even as it stands ruined, it is a mighty uarry from which poets yet
unborn will hew spiritual marble for houses not made with hands.



Footnote 

  In the year  ..

Footnote 

  trabo, ook I, chap. I.

Footnote 

  Annals, ook I, chap. .

Footnote 

  atural istory, ook .

Footnote 

  ildas. ee ix ld English hroniclesohns Libraries.

Footnote 

  ennell odd ustoms and Lore of odern reece. tuart lennie
  reek Folk ongs.

Footnote 

  harles odfrey Leland Etruscan oman emains in Popular Tradition.

Footnote 

  hys eltic Folklore, p.  urtin Tales of the Fairies and of
  the host World and r. Leland uncans Fairy eliefs from ounty
  Leitrim in Folklore, une, .

Footnote 

  The abinogi of Pwyll, Prince of yfed.

Footnote 

  The story of Lludd and Llevelys.

Footnote 

  ulhwch and lwen.

Footnote 

  orte arthur, ook I, chaps. I and II.

Footnote 

  enry III, act , scene .

Footnote 

  hys ibbert Lectures, p. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  A good account of the Irish festivals is given by Lady Wilde in her
  Ancient Legends of Ireland, pp. .

Footnote 

  Pennant A Tour in cotland and oyage to the ebrides, .

Footnote 

  artin escription of the Western Islands of cotland, .

Footnote 

  aidoz Esuisse de la ligion des aulois, p. .

Footnote 

  omme Ethnology in Folklore, pp. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  itchell The Past in the Present, pp. , .

Footnote 

  Elton rigins of English istory, p. .

Footnote 

  omme Ethnology in Folklore, p. .

Footnote 

  The word ee probably meant divinity. The river was also called
  yfridwy, i.e. water of the divinity. ee hys Lectures on Welsh
  Philology, p. .

Footnote 

  hys eltic ritain, p. .

Footnote 

  ogers ocial Life in cotland, chap. III, p. .

Footnote 

  Folklore, chap. III, p. .

Footnote 

  enderson Folklore of orthern ounties, p. .

Footnote 

  omme Ethnology in Folklore, p. .

Footnote 

  ope oly Wells of England arvey oly Wells of Ireland.

Footnote 

  ikes ritish oblins, p. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  oden Progress of the eformation in Ireland, pp. .

Footnote 

  artin escription of the Western Islands, pp. .

Footnote 

  urne hropshire Folklore, p. .

Footnote 

  omme Ethnology in Folklore, pp. .

Footnote 

  Ibid., p. .

Footnote 

  Adamnans ita olumb.

Footnote 

  r. Whitley tokes Three iddle Irish omilies.

Footnote 

  aesar e ello allico, ook , chap. II.






                                APPEI


                   A FEW  P ELTI YTLY
                             A LITEATE

The obect of this short list is merely to supplement the marginal notes
by pointing out to a reader desirous of going deeper into the subect
the most recent and accessible works upon it. That they should be
accessible is, in its intention, the most important thing and therefore
only books easily and cheaply obtainable will be mentioned.


                              ITTY

atthew Arnold.TE TY F ELTI LITEATE. Popular Edition.
    London, .

Ernest enan.TE PETY F TE ELTI AE and other studies.
    Translated by William . utchinson. London, .

    Two elouent appreciations of eltic literature.

agnus aclean, .A., ..L.TE LITEATE F TE ELT. Its
    istory and omance. London, .

    A handy exposition of all the branches of eltic literature.

Elizabeth A. harp editor.LYA ELTIA. An Anthology of
    epresentative eltic Poetry. Ancient Irish, Alban, aelic,
    reton, ymric, and odern cottish and Irish eltic Poetry.
    With introduction and notes by William harp. Edinburgh, .

Alfred utt.ELTI A EIAL AE. o.  of r. utts
    Popular tudies in ythology, omance, and Folklore. London,
    .

    A pamphlet briefly tracing the indebtedness of medival
    European literature to premedival eltic sources.


                               ITIAL

. dArbois de ubainville.LA IILIATI E ELTE ET ELLE E
    LPPE IE. Paris, .

    ol. I of the authors monumental ours de Littrature
    celtiue.

Patrick Weston oyce.A IAL ITY F AIET IELA, treating
    of the overnment, ilitary ystem, and Law eligion, Learning,
    and Art Trades, Industries, and ommerce anners, ustoms, and
    omestic Life of the Ancient Irish People.  vols. London, .

harles I. Elton, F..A.II F ELI ITY. econd edition,
    revised. London, .

ohn hys.ELTI ITAI. Early ritain eries. London, .

. dArbois de ubainville.ITTI  LTE E LA LITTATE
    ELTIE. ol. I of the ours de Littrature celtiue. Paris,
    .

    ontains, among other information, the fullest and most
    authentic account of the druids and druidism.


                            AELI YTLY

. dArbois de ubainville.LE YLE YTLIE ILAAI ET LA
    YTLIE ELTIE. ol. II of the ours de Littrature
    celtiue. Paris, . Translated into English as

  TE II YTLIAL YLE A ELTI YTLY. With notes by
    . I. est. ublin, .

    An account of Irish mythical history and of some of the greater
    aelic gods. With chapters on some of the more striking phases
    of eltic belief.

Alfred utt.TE YAE F A,  F FEAL. An Irish istoric
    Legend of the eighth century. Edited by uno eyer. With essays
    upon the appy therworld in Irish yth and upon the eltic
    octrine of ebirth. ol. IThe appy therworld. ol. IIThe
    eltic octrine of ebirth. rimm Library, ols. I and I.
    London, .

    ontains, among other notable contributions to the study of
    eltic mythology, an enuiry into the nature of the Tuatha 
    anann, a subect briefly treated in the same authors

  TE FAIY YTLY F AEPEAE. o.  of Popular tudies in
    ythology, omance, and Folklore. London, .

Patrick Weston oyce.L ELTI AE. Translated from the
    aelic. London, .

    A retelling in popular modern style of some of the more
    important mythological and Fenian stories.

Lady regory. A FITI E. The story of the Tuatha 
    anann and of the Fianna of Erin. Arranged and put into English
    by Lady regory. With a Preface by W. . Yeats. London, .

    overs much the same ground as r. oyces book, but in more
    literary manner.

Alfred utt.IA A TE IAI LITEATE. o.  of Popular
    tudies in ythology, omance, and Folklore. London, .

    A short survey of the literature connected with the Fenians.

ohn regorson ampbell, inister of Tiree.TE FIA. tories,
    poems, and traditions of Fionn and his Warrior and,
    collected entirely from oral sources. With introduction and
    bibliographical notes by Alfred utt. ol. I of Waifs and
    trays of eltic Tradition. London, .

    An account of the Fenians from the cottishaelic side.

Alfred utt.LAI TE II AILLE. o.  of Popular
    tudies in ythology, omance, and Folklore. London, .

    A brief but excellent introduction to the uchulainn cycle.

Lady regory.LAI F ITEE. The story of the en of the
    ed ranch of lster. Arranged and put into English by Lady
    regory. With a Preface by W. . Yeats. London, .

    A retelling in poetic prose of the tales connected with
    uchulainn.

Eleanor ull.TE LLI AA I II LITEATE. eing a
    collection of stories relating to the ero uchullin, translated
    from the Irish by various scholars. ompiled and edited with
    introduction and notes by Eleanor ull. With ap of Ancient
    Ireland. rimm Library, ol. III. London, .

    A series of uchulainn stories from the ancient Irish
    manuscripts. ore literal than Lady regorys adaptation.

. dArbois de ubainville.LPPE ELTIE E ILAE. ol.  of
    the ours de Littrature celtiue. Paris, .

    A collection, translated into French, of some of the principal
    stories of the uchulainn cycle, with various appendices upon
    aelic mythological subects.

L. Winifred Faraday, .A.TE ATTLE AI F ALE Tain o
    uailgne. An old Irish proseepic translated for the first time
    from the Leabhar na hidhri and the Yellow ook of Lecan. rimm
    Library, ol. I. London, .

    A strictly literal rendering of the central episode of the
    uchulainn cycle.


                           ITI YTLY

Ivor . ohn.TE AII. o.  of Popular tudies in
    ythology, omance, and Folklore. London, .

    A pamphlet introduction to the abinogion literature.

Lady harlotte uest.TE AII. From the Welsh of the LLYF
      EET the ed ook of ergest in the library of esus
    ollege, xford. Translated, with notes, by Lady harlotte
    uest.

      First edition. Text, translation, and notes,  vols., .
                     Translation and notes only,  vol., .
                     The oys abinogion, .

    heap editions of this classic have been lately issued. ne may
    obtain it in r. utts handsome little volume as one of ents
    Temple lassics or in the Welsh Library.

. Loth.LE AII, traduits en entier pour la premire fois en
    franais avec un commentaire explicatif et des notes critiues.
     vols. ols. III and I of e ubainvilles ours de
    Littrature celtiue. Paris, .

    A more exact translation than that of Lady uest, with notes
    embodying more recent scholarship.

. A. iles, ..L.L ELI ILE, including ... eoffrey
    of onmouths ritish istory, ildas, ennius ... Edited, with
    illustrative notes, by . A. iles, ..L. ohns Antiuarian
    Library. London, .

    The most accessible edition of eoffrey of onmouth.

ir Thomas alory.TE TE AT. Edited by r. . skar ommer.
    ol. Ithe Text. ol. IIlossary, Index, c. ol. IIItudy on
    the ources. London, .

    ol. I of this, the best text of the orte arthur, can be
    obtained separately.

essie L. Weston.I AT A I IT. A survey of Arthurian
    romance. o.  of Popular tudies in ythology, omance, and
    Folklore. London, .

Alfred utt.TE LEE F TE LY AIL. o.  of Popular
    tudies in ythology, omance, and Folklore. London, .

    seful introductions to a more special study of Arthurian
    literature.


                 PAATIE TY F ELTI YTLY

ohn hys.LETE  TE II A WT F ELII A
    ILLTATE Y ELTI EATE. The ibbert Lectures for
    . London, .

ohn hys.TIE I TE ATIA LEE. xford, .

    These two volumes are the most important attempts yet made
    towards a scientific and comprehensive study of the eltic
    mythology.


                       ELTI FAIY A FL LE


                                 AELI

T. rofton roker.FAIY LEE A TAITI F TE T F
    IELA.

    This book is one of the earliest, and, if not the most
    scientific, perhaps the most attractive of the many collections
    of Irish fairylore. Later compilations are r. William
    Larminies

    West Irish Folktales and omances, and r. eremiah urtins
    ero Tales of Ireland, yths and Folklore of Ireland, and
    Tales of the Fairies, collected in outh unster. n the
    cotch side, notice should be particularly taken of ampbells
    Popular Tales of the West ighlands and the volumes entitled
    Waifs and trays of eltic Tradition. All these books are
    either recent or recently republished, and are merely selected
    out of a large list of works, valuable and otherwise, upon this
    lighter side of eltic mythology.


                                ITI

ohn hys.ELTI FLLE, WEL A A.  vols. xford, .

Wirt ikes.ITI LI Welsh Folklore, Fairy ythology,
    Legends, and Traditions. y Wirt ikes, nited tates onsul for
    Wales. London, .


                     FLLE PAATIELY TEATE

eorge Laurence omme.ETLY I FLLE. odern cience
    eries. London, .

    An attempt to assign apparently nonAryan beliefs and customs
    in the ritish islands to preAryan inhabitants.






                                 IE


 Aberffraw, marriage of ranwen at, .
 Abergeleu, sacred well at, .
 Achill Island, folktales preserved at, .
 Achilles, the Irish, .
 Achren, battle of, , 
   castle of, .
 Acrisius, .
 Adamnans Life of aint olumba, , .
 Advocates Library at Edinburgh, , .
 Aebh, wife of Lr, .
 Aed, son of Lr, .
 Aedh, son of iodhchaoin, .
 Aeife, wife of Lr, , , .
 Aerfon, a title of the river ee, .
 s dhe, the folk of the mounds, the gods or fairies, , .
 Africa, , , , .
 Aganippus, king of the Franks, , .
 Agriculture god of, ritish, 
   a aulish, .
 Ailbhe, fosterdaughter of odb the ed, .
 Aileach, grave of uada at, , .
 Ailill, king of onnaught, , , , , , , .
 Ailinn, lovestory of, , .
 Ailioll of Arran, .
 Ain, ueen of the fairies of outh unster, .
 Ainle, one of the sons of snach, , , .
 Airceltrai, the sdh of gma, , .
 Airem, Eochaid, high king of Ireland, , , , , , , ,
    .
 Airem, meaning of the word, , .
 Airmid, daughter of iancecht, , , , .
 Alator, a wargod worshipped in ritain, .
 Alaw, river in Anglesey, , .
 Alba, , , , , , , , 
   eirdres farewell to, .
 Albania, a name for Alba, .
 Ale of oibniu, .
 Allobroges, , .
 Amaethon, son of n, ritish god of Agriculture, , , , ,
    , 
   fights against rn in the battle of Achren, 
   assists ulhwch to win lwen, .
 Amergin, druid of the ilesians, .
 Amesbury, castle of, .
 Amlwch, stream of, .
 Ana, see Anu.
 Ancient ritons, who were the, .
 Aneurin, a sixthcentury ritish bard, , , .
 Aneurin, the ook of, .
 Anglesey, island of, , , , , .
 Angloaxon, our descent not entirely, .
 Anguish, Anguissance, king of Ireland, .
 Angus, aelic god of love and beauty, , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , 
   his attributes, 
   his wooing of aer, 
   cheats his father, the agda, 
   steals Etain from ider, 
   helps iarmait and rainne, , , 
   matches his pigs against the Fenians, .
 Anicetus, ol Apollo, a omanoritish god, .
 Animals, sacred, , , 
   sacrifices of, , , , .
 Anna, sister of Arthur, .
 Annals of the Four asters, .
 Annwn, the ritish therworld, , , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 Annwn, the poiling of, a poem by Taliesin, , , , .
 Anu, or Ana, a aelic goddess of prosperity and abundance, 
   the Paps of Ana, 
   still living in folklore as Aynia and Ain, .
 Aoibhinn, ueen of the fairies of orth unster, .
 Aoife, an Amazon defeated by uchulainn, , , .
 Aphrodit, the ritish, , .
 Apollo, the aelic, 
   the ritish, 
   a temple of, in ritain, , .
 Apples, of the arden of the esperides, , , 
   in the eltic Elysium, , .
 Appletree of Ailenn, .
 Auitani, .
 Aranon, son of il, .
 Arawn, king of Annwn, , , , , , , , , , ,
    .
 Ardan, a son of snach, , , .
 Ard hein, .
 Arddu, lack tone of, .
 Ars, .
 Argetlm, , .
 Arianrod, a ritish goddess, , , , , , 
   her place in later legend taken by Arthurs sister, .
 Armagh, , .
 Arnold, atthew, , , .
 Arran, Isle of, , , .
 Art, the Lonely, king of Tara, , .
 Artaius, ercurius, a aulish god, .
 Arthur, , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , 
   the mythical and the historical, , 
   assumes the attributes of wydion, 
   the poiling of Annwn by, 
   becomes head of the ritish Pantheon, 
   wins lwen for ulhwch, 
   in eoffrey of onmouths istory, , 
   leads the Wild unt, .
 Arthurian Legend, tudies in the, Professor hyss, , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 Artur, son of emed, .
 Aryans, , , , 
   common traditions of the, , , 
   Aryan languages, .
 Astarte, worshipped at orbridge, .
 Astolat, .
 Athens, .
 Athlone, , .
 Augusel, a king of cotland, .
 Aurelius, a ritish king, .
 Avallach, see Avallon.
 Avallon, a ritish god of the nderworld, , 
   Isle of, , and see Avilion.
 Avebury, the castle of, .
 Avilion, , , , , , , , .
 Aynia, a fairy ueen of lster, .

 abylon, .
 adb, a aelic wargoddess, , , , , , 
   the name often used generically, 
   description of a, .
 adger in the bag, the game of, , .
 adon, battle of, .
 aile, lovestory of, .
 ailes trand, , .
 aocassus, Temple of the sungod elinus at, .
 ala lake, .
 alan, , , .
 alder, .
 algatan, a mountain near ong, .
 alin, , , , .
 allymagauran, village of, .
 allymote, ook of, , , , , , .
 allysadare, .
 alor, a king of the Fomors, , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , 
   his evil eye, 
   kills uada and acha, 
   is blinded by Lugh, 
   tales of, in modern folklore, .
 alors ill, , .
 an, king of enwyk, , , .
 anba, a goddess representing Ireland, 
   an ancient name of Ireland, , .
 anshee, meaning of the word, .
 aoisgne, lann, , .
 ards, , .
 ardsey Island, .
 arrow, river, how it got its name, .
 arrule, outh, .
 arry, the, .
 asue race, .
 ath, , , , , .
 athursts oman Antiuities in Lydney Park, .
 attle of Achren, 
   of adon, 
   of amlan, , , , , , 
   of lontarf, 
   of abhra, , , , 
   of ag ath, 
   of oytura orthern, , 
   of oytura outhern, 
   of the Trees, , .
 ayeux, temple of elinus at, .
 ean, curious passage relating to the, , .
 ecuma of the Fair kin, .
 edivere, ir, .
 edwini, Arthurs bishop, .
 edwyr, a follower of Arthur, , , .
 elacatudor, a wargod worshipped in ritain, .
 elg, , .
 eli, a ritish god, , , , , , , .
 elinus, a eltic sungod, , , 
   as a king of ritain, , , .
 elisama, the Latin name of the ibble, .
 eltaine, the aelic ayday, , , , , , , .
 erber race, .
 eth, an Iberian god, .
 ettwsycoed, .
 euno, aint, sacrifices of cattle to, .
 ignife, sla, , .
 il, father of the aelic gods and men, , , , , , .
 illingsgate, origin of name, .
 irds, of hiannon, the, , , 
   echtir and her maidens changed into, .
 lack ook of aermarthen, the, , , , , .
 ladud, mythical founder of ath, .
 lathnat, daughter of ider, , .
 liant, astle, .
 lodeuwedd, wife of Lleu Llaw yffes, , , .
 loodfines among the elts, 
   bloodfine paid for ian, .
 oann, wife of the agda, , , .
 oar, wild, of engulben, 
   the oar Trwyth, .
 odb the ed, son of the agda, , , , , , , 
   is made king of the Tuatha  anann, 
   his swineherd, 
   marries his daughter adb to Finn, .
 ogles, , , .
 onfires in eltic ritual, .
 ordeaux, ir uon of, .
 oread, .
 orrach, , , .
 ors, king of aul, .
 ors, ir, , .
 oyne, river, , , , , , , , , .
 rahmans, .
 ran, son of Febal, an Irish king, , , .
 ran, Finns favourite hound, .
 rn, ritish god of the nderworld, , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , 
   fights the battle of Achren, 
   becomes the Wonderful ead, 
   in eoffrey of onmouths istory, , 
   in the orte arthur, , 
   introduces hristianity into ritain, .
 randegore, ing, , .
 randegoris, ing, .
 randel, randiles, ir, .
 ranwen, ritish goddess of love, , , .
 razil, .
 rea, ford of, Finn killed at the, .
 reasals Island, .
 rcilien, Forest of, .
 regon, .
 rennius, a mythical ritish king, , , , .
 rennus, .
 ress, son of Elathan, a Fomor, , , , , , , ,
    
   his beauty, 
   marries rigit, and is made king over the Tuatha  anann, 
   is forced to abdicate, 
   makes war on the Tuatha  anann, 
   is defeated and captured, .
 rian, son of Tuirenn, , , , , , , , .
 riareus, .
 ridge of the liff, the, .
 ridget, aint, , , .
 rigantes, a orth ritish tribe, .
 rigantia, a ritish inerva, .
 rigindo, a aulish goddess, .
 rigit, aelic goddess of fire, poetry, and the hearth, , , ,
    , , , , 
   is married to ress, 
   is canonized as aint ridget, , .
 ri Leith, the sdh of ider, , , , .
 rindled ox, the, .
 ritain, ancient names of, , .
 ritish oblins, r. Wirt ikes, , , .
 ritons, ancient, who were the, .
 IT, ITIA. ee istoria, eoffrey, ennius.
 rittany, .
 riun, son of ethar, .
 rownies, , , .
 rude, king of the Picts, .
 rughnaboyne, , , , , .
 rutus, , .
 rythons, , , , , .
 uarainech, father of alor, .
 uinne, the uthless ed, son of Fergus, , , .
 ull, the rown, of ualgne, , , , 
   the Whitehorned, of onnaught, , .
 wbachod, .

 adbury, the supposed site of amelot, .
 ader Idris, .
 aemhoc, aint, .
 aer, daughter of Etal Ambuel, .
 aer Arianrod, , .
 aer adus, .
 aer annawg, .
 aer olvin, .
 aer athyl, , .
 aer olud, .
 aer Llyr, .
 aer London, .
 aer yrddin, .
 aer chren, .
 aer Pedryvan, , , .
 aer igor, .
 aer arrlog, .
 aer idi, , , , .
 aer andwy, , .
 aer edwyd, .
 aer Wydyr, .
 aesar, ulius, , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , .
 airbr, son of ormac, , , .
 airn of ctriallach, .
 airpr, son of gma, bard of the Tuatha  anann, , , , , .
 alais, .
 alatin the wizard, , 
   daughters of alatin, .
 aledonians, .
 amelot, , .
 amlan, battle of, , , , , , .
 amulodunum, the oman name of olchester, .
 amulus, a aulish god of war and the sky, , , , .
 aoilte, a Fenian hero, , , , , , , , .
 aractacus, aratacus, , , .
 aradawc of the trong Arms, son of rn, , , , , , .
 arbonek, , .
 armarthen, .
 arnac, .
 arnarvon, .
 arrowmore, .
 assibellawn, assivelaunus, .
 assiopeias hair, .
 astell y och, .
 astle of Arianrod, , .
 astle liant, .
 astle of wydion, .
 astle acket, .
 astle of evelry, , .
 astle of iches, .
 astles, eltic, .
 aswallawn, son of eli, .
 ath odeu. ee the attle of the Trees.
 athbad, druid of Emain acha, , , , , , , , .
 athubodva, a aulish wargoddess, .
 auldrons in eltic mythology the agdas, , , 
   of gyrvran the iant, 
   of iwrnach the ael, , 
   cauldron given by rn to atholwch, , , 
   cauldron stolen from ider by uchulainn, , 
   cauldron kept in Annwn by the chief of ades, , , 
   the legend of the oly rail founded upon eltic myths of a cauldron
      of fertility and inspiration, .
 elt, .
 eltic mythical literature the forerunner of medival romance, .
 eltic strain in modern Englishmen, .
 elts, the, , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , .
 emmes, a parish in Pembrokeshire, .
 enn ruaich, .
 ermait, i.e. oneymouth, a title of gma, .
 eth, son of iancecht, , .
 ethlenn, wife of alor, .
 hain, Lughs, 
   chiefs, .
 hampion of the Tuatha  anann, , 
   hampions of the ed ranch, see ed ranch
   The hampions Prophecy, .
 hariots, war, of the elts, , , .
 haron, .
 haucer, , .
 hess, iders game with Eochaid Airem, 
   ssians game with Finn, .
 hildren of n, udd, and Llyr, .
 hristianity, introduced into ritain by rn, , 
   conuers ruidism, , 
   adopts harmless heathen cults, , .
 ian, son of iancecht, , , , , , , , , ,
    , .
 iaran, aint, .
 ichol the Footless, a Fomor, .
 ilgwri, the usel of, .
 lann aoisgne, , , 
 lan hattan, .
 lann orna, , , , .
 lann eamhuinn, , .
 lann onan, .
 las yrddin, an old name for ritain, .
 laudius, oman emperor, .
 liodna, fairy ueen of unster, .
 lontarf, battle of, .
 ld, goddess of the river lyde, , .
 luricanes, .
 noc iodhchaoin, .
 nucha, battle of, .
 oblynau, .
 ocidius, a wargod worshipped by a acian colony in umberland, .
 oed elen, .
 oel, a mythical king of ritain, , .
 oir Anmann, the hoice of ames, an old Irish tract, , , ,
    , .
 olchester, .
 ole, ld ing, .
 ollen, aint, , , .
 olumba, aint, , , , .
 omes ritanni, .
 omes Littoris axonici, .
 omyn, ichael, a aelic poet, .
 onair the reat, high king of Ireland, , .
 onall the ictorious, , , , , , , .
 onan, a Fenian hero, , .
 onann, son of Febar, a king of the Fomors, .
 onchobar, king of lster, , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , 
   his treachery towards the sons of snach, 
   his tragical death, .
 ondates, a wargod worshipped in ritain, .
 ong, village of, , .
 onlaoch, son of uchulainn, , .
 onn the undred Fighter, , .
 onn, son of Lr, .
 onn, son of iodhchaoin, .
 onnaught, , , , , .
 onnla, son of onn the undred Fighter, .
 ontemporary eview, the, .
 ontrary ead, .
 onway, river, .
 ookingplaces of the Fenians, .
 ookingspits of the women of Fianchuiv, 
   at Tara, .
 ooley, see ualgne.
 oranians, a mythical tribe of dwarfs, .
 orb, an Iberian god, .
 orbridge, .
 orc, son of iodhchaoin, .
 orcauibhne, .
 orcaidce, .
 ordeilla, daughter of Leir, in eoffrey of onmouths istory,
    .
 ordelia, daughter of hakespeares ing Lear, , .
 oritiacus, a wargod worshipped in ritain, .
 ormac, the agnificent, , , , , , , .
 ornwall, , , , , , , , , .
 oronation tone, the, .
 orrib, see Lough orrib.
 orspitium, see orbridge.
 orwenna, mother of rennius and elinus, .
 ount of ritain, 
   of the axon hore, .
 ourt of n, the, , .
 ow, alors ray, , , , 
   iders three cows, , .
 ow, ook of the un, , , , , , , , , , .
 redn, the bronzeworker of the Tuatha  anann, , , .
 rete, .
 reudylad, daughter of the ritish skygod Lludd, , , , ,
    , , .
 riminal esolutions of ritain, the Three, .
 rom roich, .
 romm ruaich, , , , , .
 ronos, , , .
 roppies rave, the, at Tara, .
 ruind, the river, .
 u, son of iancecht, , .
 ualgne, a province of lster, , , .
 uan, head of the unster Fenians, .
 uchulainn, chief hero of the ltonians, , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , 
   is the son of Lugh, 
   obvious solar character of, 
   how he obtained his name, 
   fights in the Tin  huailgne, 
   his wooing of Emer, 
   his raid upon the ther World, 
   his death, 
   is raised from the dead by aint Patrick, .
 ulann, chief smith of the ltonians, 
   ulanns ound, , .
 ultureing, .
 umhal, father of Finn, , , , .
 unedda, a orth ritish king, .
 unobelinus, king of ritain, .
 uroi, king of unster, , , .
 ustennin, , .
 uthbert, aint, bulls sacrificed to, .
 wm awlwyd, the wl of, .
 wm Annwn, the ounds of ell, , .
 wy, .
 ymbeline, hakespeares, .
 ymri, , .

 agda, the, aelic god of the Earth, , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , 
   his dress, arms, and harp, 
   his porridgefeast, 
   is cheated by his son Angus, 
   resigns the kingship of the Tuatha  anann, 
   his last appearance, .
 aire of ualgne, owner of the rown ull, .
 aln, druid of Eochaid Airem, .
 anes, the, .
 anu, the mother of the aelic gods, the same as Anu, .v., , ,
    , , , , .
 art, river, .
 artmoor, .
 arvha, Lake, .
 eaf alley, the, .
 echtir, mother of uchulainn, , , , .
  anann, see Tuatha  anann.
 ee, river, .
 eimne, the first name of Finn, .
 eirdre, 
   eirdres Farewell to Alba, 
   eirdres Lament over the ons of snach, .
 emetia, oman province of, , .
 emetrius, an early traveller in ritain, .
 emon of the air, Aeife changed into a, .
 erivla, a sacred well in the island of Inniskea, .
 esmond, fourth Earl of, nicknamed the agician, .
 estiny, laying a, a eltic custom, , .
 evon, , .
 evwy, the dales of, .
 ialogue of the Elders, the, , , 
   ialogues of Patrick and ssian, .
 iancecht, the aelic god of medicine, , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , 
   makes a silver hand for uada, 
   kills his son iach, 
   presides over the pring of ealth, 
   prescriptions of iancecht, .
 iarmait uibhne, the Fenian Adonis, , , , .
 inadan, ir, .
 inas inllev, .
 inas Emrys, , .
 ingwall, egisters of the Presbytery of, .
 innsenchus, , , , .
 io assius, .
 iodorus iculus, , , .
 ionysus, rites of, .
 is Pater, , , , .
 issull the iant, .
 iwrnach the ael, the cauldron of, , .
 obhar, king of icily, , , , .
 octrine of the transmigration of souls, , .
 omnann, Fir, i.e. men of omnu. ee Fir omnann.
 omnu, a goddess, mother of the Fomors, , , 
   meaning of the name, 
   gods of omnu, , 
   men of omnu, .
 n, the ritish euivalent of the aelic anu, , , , , ,
    , , , , 
   euhemerized into a king of ublin, .
 onn, son of il, , .
 onns ouse, .
 ormarth, the hound of wyn son of udd, .
 owth, .
 ragon, ed, of ritain, 
   White, of the axons, .
 ragonmouth, a lake called, .
 ream of honabwy, the, , , , .
 rogheda, .
 rowes, river, .
 rudwyn, the whelp of reid the son of Eri, .
 ruidism, the religion of the elts, , 
   possibly nonAryan in origin, 
   in aul, 
   derived from ritain, 
   suppressed by the omans, , .
 ruids, , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , 
   origin of the name, 
   in aul, 
   in ritain, 
   human sacrifices of the druids, , 
   the druids of rude, king of the Picts, .
 rumcain, an old name for Tara, .
 ublin, , .
 uke of the ritains, the, .
 ulachan, , .
 uldauna, the, .
 un ow, ook of the. ee ow.
 undalk, .
 undealgan, , , , .
 n caith, .
 ux ritanniarum. ee uke of the ritains.
 wynwen, aint, .
 yfan, aint, .
 yfed, or emetia, a province of outh Wales, , , , , ,
    , , , , , , .
 ylan, a ritish god, , , , , , , .

 Eagle, of wern Abwy, 
   Lleu changed into an, .
 Earl erald, .
 Easal, king of the olden Pillars, , .
 Eber, son of il, , , .
 Eber cot, .
 Eboracum, oman name of York, .
 Edeyrn, son of udd, .
 Edinburgh, the Advocates Library at, .
 Eel, the orrg takes the shape of an, 
   transformation of the rival swineherds into eels, .
 Egypt, .
 Eigen, the first female saint in ritain, .
 Eildon ills, Arthur living beneath the, .
 Elaine, .
 Elathan, a king of the Fomors, , , , , , , .
 Elayne, .
 Elberich, .
 Elders, ialogue of the. ee ialogue.
 Elen Lwyddawg, wife of yrddin, , .
 Eleutherius, Pope, .
 Ellylion, the Welsh elves, .
 Eltons rigins of English istory, , , , , , , , .
 Elves, .
 Elysium, eltic. ee ther World, eltic.
 Emain acha, the capital of ancient lster, , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , .
 Emer, wife of uchulainn, , , , .
 Emer, the Wooing of, an old Irish saga, , , , .
 Emperor, a title given in Welsh legend to Arthur, , .
 Emrys, a title of yrddin, , , , .
 Englishmen, eltic strain in, .
 Entertaining of the oble ead, the, .
 Eochaid, son of Erc, king of the Fir olgs, , , , .
 Eochaid Airem, see Airem.
 Eochaid Flynn, an Irish poet, .
 Erc, king of Tara, , , .
 Eremon, son of il, and first king of Ireland, , , , , ,
    , , .
 Erin, , , , , , , , , 
   meaning of the word, .
 Eriu, a goddess representing Ireland, , , , .
 Eros, the aelic, , .
   ee Angus.
 Essyllt, wife of arch, or ark. ee Iseult.
 Etain, wife of ider, , , , , , .
 Etair, a vassal of ing onchobar, .
 Etal Ambuel, father of aer, .
 Etan, wife of gma, , , .
 Ethnea, a name of Ethniu in modern folklore, .
 Ethniu, daughter of alor, , , , , , .
 Ethnology in Folklore, r. . L. ommes, , , , , , .
 Etirun, an idol of the ritons, .
 Etive, Loch, .
 Etruscans, the,  Etruscan mythology in modern Italian folklore, .
 Ettard, .
 Ettarre, Pelleas and, Tennysons idyll of, .
 Euhemerism of aelic gods, 
   of ritish gods, .
 Euskarian race, .
 Evelake, ing, .
 Evnissyen, son of Penardun, , , .

 Failinis, the hound of the king of Ioruaidh, , , .
 Fairie ueene, pensers, , .
 Fairies, the, , , , , , , , 
   the old gods are remembered as fairies, , 
   two varieties of fairy in folklore, 
   Irish and Welsh fairies identical in nature, 
   king of the Irish fairies, 
   king of the Welsh fairies, 
   size of the fairies, 
   fairy money, 
   fairy food, 
   the fairy hills, , .
 Fal, the stone of. ee tone of estiny.
 Falcon of ay, 
   Falcon of ummer, .
 Falga, Isle of, , .
 Falias, a city of the Tuatha  anann, , .
 Fand, wife of anannn son of Lr, , .
 Faraday, iss, her translation of the Tin  huailgn, .
 Fata organa, .
 Fate of the hildren of Lr, 
   of the ons of Tuirenn, 
   of the ons of snach, .
 Fea, a wargoddess, wife of uada, .
 Feast of Age, anannns, , , .
 Feast of Lugh, see Lugnassad.
 Feast of t. ohn, .
 Fecs Pool, on the oyne, .
 Fedlimid, vassal to ing onchobar, .
 Fenians, the, , , , , , , , , ,
    , , 
   real or mythical, 
   origin of, 
   duties of, 
   accomplishments of, 
   chief heroes of, 
   destruction of, at the battle of abhra, 
   stories of, 
   the Fenian sagas possibly nonAryan, .
 Fenius Farsa, .
 Ferdiad, a warrior slain by uchulainn, , , .
 Fergus, son of Finn, .
 Fergus, son of oy, an lster hero, , , , , , ,
    , , .
 Fergusson, r. ames, , , , .
 Festivals, eltic solar or agricultural, .
 Ffordd Elen, .
 Fiacha, son of onchobar, , .
 Fiachadh, king of Ireland, .
 Fiachra, son of Lr, .
 Fianchuiv, submarine island of, , .
 Fianna Eirinn, see Fenians.
 Figol, son of amos, druid of the Tuatha  anann, .
 Findabair, daughter of edb, .
 Findias, a city of the Tuatha  anann, , .
 Finn mac oul umhail, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , 
   his upbringing and boyfeats, 
   reorganizes the Fenians, 
   is killed at the Ford of rea, 
   is reborn as ongan, an lster chief, 
   is he historical or mythical, 
   parallels between Finn and Arthur, .
 Finn mac orman, compiler of the ook of Leinster, .
 Finn the eer, .
 Finola, daughter of Lr, .
 Finvarra, king of the Irish fairies, , , .
 Fiona acleod, iss, .
 Fionn, see Finn.
 Fionnbharr, the sdh of eadha assigned to, 
   his appearance in the Fenian sagas, 
   becomes fairy king of Ireland, .
 Fir olgs, an Iberian tribe, , , , , , , .
 Fir omnann, an Iberian tribe, , , .
 Fir aillion, an Iberian tribe, , .
 Fish, sacred, .
 Fly, Etain changed into a, 
   Lugh takes the form of a, 
   a sacred, .
 Folklore, Ethnology in. ee Ethnology.
 Folktales, Irish,  Welsh, .
 Fomors, aelic deities of eath, arkness, and the ea, , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , 
   meaning of the name, 
   their war with the Tuatha  anann, 
   are the Lochlannach in the Fenian sagas, .
 Forgall the Wily, father of Emer, , , , .
 Fotla, a goddess representing Ireland, 
   an ancient name of Ireland, .
 Four Ancient ooks of Wales, the, , .
   ee also kene.
 Four ranches of the abinogi, the, , , , , , , .
 Fourcornered castle, the, .
 Frazers olden ough, .
 Frivolous attles of ritain, The Three, .
 Frogs, sacred, .
 Fury, reat, and Little Fury, two swords of anannn, , .

 abhra, battle of, , , , .
 abius, a oman consul, .
 abriel ounds, the, .
 ae bolg, uchulainns spear, , , .
 aels, , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    .
 aiar, son of anannn, .
 aillion, Fir. ee Fir aillion.
 alahad, ir, , , .
 alanmai, Welsh spring festival, .
 an eanach, .
 arden of the esperides, the, , , .
 argantua, abelais, .
 ast hymris cubs, , .
 aul, , , , , , .
 auls, the, , , , .
 avida, , .
 avideen o, .
 awain, ir, , , , , .
 easa, taboos among the Irish elts, , , .
 enii locorum, .
 eoffrey of onmouth, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 eorges ill, aint, .
 eraint, , .
 ildas, a ritish writer, .
 lamour, the ealm of, an old name for yfed, .
 lamour put on uchulainn by athbad, 
   by the daughters of alatin, , 
   put on the sons of snach, 
   on Arianrod, , 
   on yfed, .
 lass astle, of the Fomors, 
   a synonym for the other world, , .
 lastonbury, , .
 lastonbury Tor, , .
 lenn Faisi, .
 lora, Isle of, , , .
 lyn ch, , .
 obhan aer, the, , , .
 oibniu, aelic god of smithcraft, , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , 
   forges the weapons of the Tuatha  anann, , 
   kills uadan, 
   his ale, 
   survives in tradition as the obhan aer, .v.
   as a character in folktale, .
   ee avida and avideen o.
 oidel, a mythical ancestor of the Irish, .
 oidels, the, , , , , .
 olden bough, the mistletoe the, .
 olden Pillars, king of the. ee Easal.
 oll, , , .
 omme, r. . L., , , , , , , .
 onorilla, daughter of Leir, , .
 ore, . ee ower.
 oreu, Arthurs cousin, , .
 orias, a city of the Tuatha  anann, , , .
 ovannan son of n, ritish god of mithcraft, , , , 
   kills his nephew ylan, 
   assists ulhwch, .
 ower regarded as part of the other world, , , , .
 rail, the oly, , , , , .
 rainne, , , .
 raves of the Warriors, the erses of the, , , .
 ray of acha, uchulainns horse, , , , .
 reece, , , , , , , .
 reek mythology, ancient, , , 
   modern, .
 reen eadows of Enchantment, the, .
 regory, Lady, , .
 reid, the son of Eri, , .
 resholm Island, , , .
 rianainech, the sunnyfaced, an epithet of gma, .
 rianan Aileach, grave of uada at. ee Aileach.
 ronw Pebyr, , , .
 uanius, wyn as a mythical king of the uns, .
 uest, Lady harlotte, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , .
 uinevere, Arthurs ueen, , , , , , , .
 unvasius, king of the rkneys, .
 urgiunt rabtruc, king of ritain, .
 uyon, ir, in pensers Fairie ueene, , .
 walchaved, .
 walchmei, , , , , , , , , , , .
 wales, island of, , , .
 warthegyd, son of aw, .
 wawl, son of ld, Pwylls rival for hiannon, , , , , .
 weddw, owner of a magic horse, .
 weir, a form of the name wydion, .v., , , .
 wenbaus, ir, .
 wern, son of atholwch and ranwen, , , .
 winas, ir, .
 wlgawd ododin, the drinkinghorn of, .
 wragedd Annwn, .
 wrhyr, a companion of Arthur, , , , .
 wri of the olden air, .
 wrnach the iant, , .
 wyar, wife of Lludd, , , .
 wyddneu aranhir, his dialogue with wyn, 
   his magic basket, .
 wyddolwyn orr, the magic bottles of, .
 wydion son of n, the ritish ercury, , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , 
   druid of the gods, 
   father of the sungod, 
   fights the attle of the Trees, 
   is the ritish euivalent of the Teutonic Woden, 
   his place taken in later myth by Arthur, .
 wyl Awst, the Welsh August festival, .
 wyllion, .
 wyn son of udd, ritish god of the ther World, , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , 
   attributes of, 
   his dialogue with wyddneu aranhir, 
   contends with wyn for Lludds daughter reudylad, 
   is made warder of ades, 
   prominent in the Arthur legend, 
   becomes king of the Welsh fairies, 
   his interview with aint ollen, .
 wynas, ir, .
 wyngelli, a companion of Arthur, .
 wynhwyvar, , , , , .
   ee uinevere.
 wynn ygddwn, the horse of weddw, .
 wynwas, a form of the name wyn, .v., , .
 wyrd went, father of one of the three wynhwyvars, .
 wyrthur, son of reidawl, contends with wyn for reudylad, , ,
    , 
   father of one of the three wynhwyvars, .

 acket, astle, .
 ades, the eltic. ee ther World, eltic.
 ades, the reek god, , .
 ades, ead of, a name given to Pwyll, , .
 alloween, , , , .
 amitic languages, .
 appy Plain, the, , , .
   ee ag ell.
 are held sacred by the Ancient ritons, .
 arlech, , , , .
 arp of the agda, , 
   of Angus, 
   of Teirtu, .
 avgan, a king of Annwn, , .
 awthorn, chief of iants, father of lwen, , , , , .
 eifer, a blackmaned, called cean, , , 
   the orrg takes the shape of a, .
 engist, .
 enuinus, uke of ornwall, , .
 ephstus, the aelic, , , .
 eracles, , .
 er, .
 ereford, .
 ergest, the ed ook of, , , , , , , .
 erimon, .
   ee Eremon.
 erolight, uchulainns, , .
 eros salmonleap, uchulainns, .
 esiod, .
 esperides, garden of the. ee arden.
 esus, a aulish god, .
 evydd the Ancient, father of hiannon, , .
 i orchaide, .
 ibbert Lectures for  on eltic eathendom, Professor hyss,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , .
 ill of isnech, , .
 istoria ritonum of ennius, , 
   of eoffrey of onmouth, , , , , , , , , ,
      , , , .
 ittites, the, .
 oly Families of ritain, the Three hief, .
 oly rail, the. ee rail.
 oly wells, .
 omeric and eltic civilization compared, , .
 oodiecrow, , , , .
 orse of anannn mac Lir, , , 
   of weddw, 
   of wyn son of udd, , , .
 ound of ulann, the, , 
   hound of Lugh, 
   of the king of Ioruaidh, 
   hounds of Finn mac oul, 
   hounds of eltic myth, , , , .
 ull, iss Eleanor, her uchullin aga, , , , , , ,
    .
 uman sacrifices of the ruids, , 
   to romm ruaich, , , , 
   symbolical, , , .
 uon of ordeaux, ir, .
 uxley, Professor, .
 yreasail, .

 Iberians, the, , , , , , , , , , , , , 
   their physiue, 
   language, 
   original home, 
   state of culture, 
   gods, , , .
 Iddawc, the Agitator of ritain, , .
 Ilbhreach, son of anannn, , , , .
 Iliad, the, , .
 Illann the Fair, son of Fergus mac oy, , .
 Illusion, the Land of, an old name for yfed, .
 Indech, son of omnu, a king of the Fomors, , , , , , .
 Inniskea, the Lonely rane of, 
   stone worship in, .
 Invasions, the ook of, .
 Ioldanach, the aster of All Arts, a title of Lugh, , , ,
    .
 Iolo organwg, bardic name of r. Edward Williams, .
 Iolo ., the, , , , , , , .
 Iona, Adamnan, Abbot of, .
 Ioruaidhe, , , .
 Ireland, old names of, , , .
   ee also Iweridd.
 Iseult, wife of ing ark, , .
 Island, submarine, , .
 Island of the ighty, a bardic name for ritain, .
 Islands, sacred, .
 Ith, , 
   Iths Plain, , .
 Iuchar, son of Tuirenn, .
 Iucharba, son of Tuirenn, .
 Iweridd, i.e. Ireland, wife of the ritish seagod Llyr, , ,
    .

 anus, .
 avelin, ed, one of anannns spears, , .
 ohn, Feast of aint, , , .
 ones, the ev. Edward, on apparitions, .
 oseph of Arimathea, , , .
 ubainville, . . dArbois de, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , .
 udgment of Amergin, the, .
 ulius aesar, see aesar.

 acmwri, the servant of Arthur, , .
 aerlud, .
 ai, , , , , , , , .
 aritia, see alais.
 ay, ir, , .
 eening invented, .
 elli Wic, .
 eltic esearches, r. icholsons, .
 enmare, river, .
 icva, wife of Pryderi, .
 ildare, shrine of t. ridget at, .
 illaraus, ount, .
 illarney, Lake, , .
 ingly astle, see aer igor.
 irwans of astle acket, the, .
 nights, ing Arthurs, , , , , , , , .
 nockainy, .
 nockers, , .
 nockma, fairy hill of, , , .
 nockthierna, .
 nowth, , .
 ulhwch, , , , , , , .
 ulhwch and lwen, the tale of, , , , , , , ,
    , , .
 yndellig, .
 ynedyr Wyllt, , .

 Labhra, iders leech, .
 Labraid of the uick and on word, .
 Lady of the Lake, .
 Laeg, uchulainns charioteer, , , , .
 Laegaire the attlewinner, .
 Lakes, twelve chief, of Ireland, .
 Lamias, .
 Lammas, .
 Land of Illusion, 
   of appiness, , 
   of the Living, , 
   of Promise, , , 
   of ummer, , 
   of the Young, , .
 Laon, .
 Larminie, r. William, .
 Launcelot, ir, , , , , , , .
 Lear, ing, hakespeares, , , , , .
 Lecan, the ook of, , , , 
   the Yellow ook of, , .
 Leicester, , .
 Leinster, , .
 Leinster, ount, , , .
 Leinster, the ook of, , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 Leir, eoffrey of onmouths ing, .
 Leodogrance, father of uinevere, .
 Leprechaun, , , , .
 Lr, the aelic seagod, , , , , , , , , ,
    
   his rebellion against odb the ed, 
   their reconciliation, 
   the fate of the children of, 
   is killed by the Fenian hero aoilt, , .
 Levarcham, .
 Leyden, .
 Lia Fil, see tone of estiny.
 Liban, , .
 Lismore, the ook of, .
 Lla Lluanys, the anx August festival, .
 Llacheu, son of Arthur, , .
 Llandwynwyn, the church of wynwyn ranwen, in Anglesey, .
 Lleminawg, .
 Lleu Llew Llaw yffes, the ritish sungod, , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , 
   his birth, 
   and naming, 
   takes part in the attle of the Trees, 
   is changed into an eagle, 
   his place taken in later myth by walchmei, 
   and in the Arthurian legend by ir awain, .
 Llevelys, king of France, .
 Lloegyr Loegria, axon ritain, , , , .
 Lludd Llaw Ereint, the ritish eus, , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , 
   his wife wyar, 
   puts an end to the Three Plagues of ritain, 
   founds London, 
   appears in the orte arthur as ing Lot of rkney, .
 Llwyd, son of ilcoed, avenges wawl, son of ld, , .
 Llwyr, son of Llwyrion, the magic vessel of, .
 Llyn Llyw, the salmon of, .
 Llyr, the ritish seagod, , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , 
   possibly borrowed from the aels, 
   becomes the ing Leir of eoffrey of onmouth, 
   and the ing Lear of hakespeare, , 
   founds a family of saints, 
   his tomb or temple at Leicester, .
 Llyrcestre, , .
 Llys n, , .
 Llywarch n, a sixthcentury ritish poet, .
 Loch, a warrior slain by uchulainn, .
 Lochlann Lochlin, , , 
   Lochlannach, the, , .
 London, , , , .
 Londres, .
 Lot or Loth, king of rkney, , , .
 Loucetius, a wargod worshipped in ritain, .
 Lough orrib, its hores and Islands, ir William Wildes, .
 Lough ur, .
 Lucan, the oman poet, .
 Luchtain, the carpenter of the Tuatha  anann, , , , .
 Lud, king of ritain, , , .
 Ludesgata, Ludgate, , , .
 Lugaid, son of uroi, , , .
 Lugh Lamhfada, the aelic sungod, , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , 
   his spear, , , 
   his hound, , 
   his rodsling and chain, 
   his first appearance at Tara, 
   gains the title of Ioldanach, 
   avenges his fathers murder upon the sons of Tuirenn, 
   leads the Tuatha  anann against the Fomors, 
   prophecies to onn the undred Fighter, .
 Lugnassad, Lughs ommemoration, , .
 Lugudunum, town of Lugus, , .
 Lugus, the aulish sungod, , , .
 Lundy Island, , .
 Lydney, temple of odens at, 
   monograph upon it, .
 Lyons, , .

 ab, ueen, .
 abinogi, the Four ranches of the, , , .
 abinogion, , , , , , , , .
   ee also uest, Lady harlotte.
 abon, a ritish sungod, , , , , , , , .
 acaulay, .
 ac echt, a king of the Tuatha  anann, , , , .
 ac uill, a king of the Tuatha  anann, , , , .
 ac ee, Thomas Arcy, .
 ac rein, a king of the Tuatha  anann, , , , .
 ac ineely, .
 ac oineanta, a king of the Irish fairies, .
 ac ia, an old Irish poet, .
 ac c, on of the Young, a title of Angus, , .
 acPhersons ssian, .
 ac amthainn, .
 acha, a wargoddess of the aels, , , 
   meaning of her name, 
   achas acorncrop, 
   is killed by alor, .
 acleod, iss Fiona, .
 aelmuiri, scribe of the ook of the un ow, .
 aelon, .
 aenor Alun, 
   aenor Penarth, .
 aen Tyriawc, the grave of Pryderi, .
 aglaunus, uke of Albania, , .
 ag ell, the appy Plain, a name for the eltic Elysium, , .
 ag on, the Plain of ports, a name for the eltic Elysium, .
 ag lecht, human sacrifices at, , , .
 ag Tuireadh, see oytura.
 agog, .
 alory, ir Thomas, , , , , , , , .
 alvasius, king of Iceland, .
 an, Isle of, , , , , , , , , , , .
 anannn son of Lr, a aelic god, , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , 
   his armour, , 
   weapons, , 
   horse, , , 
   mantle, , , , , 
   pigs, , 
   his Feast of Age, , 
   lord of the eltic Paradise, 
   his wife Fand in love with uchulainn, 
   his friendship with ormac, king of Ireland, 
   his message to aint olumba, 
   his connection with the Isle of an, , .
 anawyddan son of Llyr, his ritish analogue, , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , 
   his attributes, 
   accompanies rn to Ireland, 
   marries hiannon, 
   defeats the magic of Llwyd, son of ilcoed, 
   constructs the boneprison of eth and Anoeth, 
   helps Arthur in the chase of Twrch Trwyth, .
 aponos, a alloritish sungod, , .
 arch, a ritish god of the nder World, , , , , .
 ark, ing, , .
 ars, , .
 aster of All Arts, see Ioldanach.
 th, a ritish god, brother to n, , , , , , , ,
    , , , 
   meaning of his name, 
   teaches magic to wydion, 
   rules from aer athyl, 
   compared with erlin, , , .
 atholwch, king of Ireland, .
 thonwy, father of th, , .
 atire de retagne, the, , .
 atthew Arnold, , , .
 ay ay, , , , .
 ay Eve, , .
 aypole, .
 eadha, the sdh of, , , .
 eath, .
 edb, ueen of onnaught, , , , , , , , ,
    , , , 
   makes war on lster to get the rown ull of ualgne, 
   becomes a fairy ueen, 
   is perhaps the original of ueen ab, .
 editerranean race, 
   editerranean ace, The, Prof. ergis, .
 edrawt, , , , , , , , .
 eleaus, or elias, de Lile, ir, .
 elga, king of the Picts, .
 eliagaunce, or eliagraunce, ir, , , .
 elwas, , , , , .
 enai traits, the, , .
 enw, , , .
 ercurius Artaius, a allooman god, , .
 ercury, , .
 erlin, , , , , , .
   ee yrddin.
 esgegra, king of Leinster, , .
 eyer, r. uno, , , , , .
 iach, son of iancecht, , , .
 idas, the ritish, .
 ider, aelic god of the nder World, , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , 
   rebels against odb the ed, 
   gambles with Eochaid Airem for possession of Etain, 
   is besieged in his sdh, and helped by the Fenians, .
 idsummer ay, , , .
 idsummer Eve, .
 il, the ancestor of the aels, , , , , , , , .
 ilesians, the, , , , , , , , .
 ilky Way, the, , , .
 inerva, , , .
 inos, .
 iodhchaoin, , , .
 istletoe, , .
 ithras, a Persian sungod worshipped at York, .
 ochdrev, .
 ochnant, .
 odron, wife of rien and mother of abon, , .
 ona, see Anglesey.
 ongan, an lster prince, a reincarnation of Finn mac oul, .
 onmouth, eoffrey of. ee eoffrey.
 orc, son of ela, a king of the Fomors, , .
 ordred, ir, , , , , , .
 orgawse, sister to Arthur, .
 orrg, the, aelic goddess of war, , , , , , , , ,
    , , , 
   description of, 
   her dealings with uchulainn on the Tin  huailgne, .
 orte arthur, ir Thomas alorys, , , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 ound, Lord of the, , .
 ountains of Ireland, the twelve chief, .
 ourie, aint, .
 ouse, anawyddan and the, .
 oyle, ea of, , .
 oytura, orthern, attle of, , , , 
   outhern, attle of, , .
 uirthemne, , , , .
 unster, , , , , .
 urias, a city of the Tuatha  anann, , .
 ur y astell, Lleus palace near ala Lake, , .
 yrddin, a ritish eus, , , , , 
   gave its first name to ritain, 
   his wife Elen, 
   his town armarthen, 
   appears in eoffrey of onmouth and in the orte arthur as erlin,
      .v.
 yrddin, a sixthcentury ritish bard, .
 ythology, importance of, 
   reek, , , , 
   candinavian, 
   eltic, its influence on English literature, , 
   on medival chivalric romance, .

 ame, ancient ritish superstitions with regard to, .
 ames, hoice of, The. ee oir Anmann.
 ames, early of ritain, , 
   of Ireland, , , .
 ant all, .
 ant y Llew, .
 aoise, son of snach, , .
 arberth, , , , , , , .
 avan Fort, .
 eamhuainn, lann, , .
 eath, ale of, , , .
 edd, river, .
 eevougi, a stone worshipped at Inniskea, .
 emed, , 
   the race of, , , , .
 emetona, a wargoddess worshipped at ath, , .
 emon, a aelic wargoddess, wife of uada, , .
 ennius, his istory of the ritons, , .
 entres, ing, , .
 ereids, .
 t, an Iberian god, .
 ew range, .
 ia, the Plain of, .
 iamh of the olden air, daughter of anannn, .
 icholsons eltic esearches, .
 iebelungenlied, .
 imue, , , .
 issyen, son of Penardun, , .
 iul, .
 oah, descent of the aelic gods and men from, .
 odens, a temple to, at Lydney, .
 orthern rown, constellation of the, .
 os galangaeof, the Welsh winter festival, .
 uada of the ilver and, a aelic eus, , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , 
   his sword, , 
   his wives, 
   his hand cut off in battle, 
   a silver hand made for him by iancecht, 
   his own hand renewed by iach and Airmid, 
   his death at the hands of alor, 
   his tomb at rianan Aileach, , .
 udd, ritish god, , , , 
   to be identified with Lludd, .v.
 utt, r. Alfred, , , , , , , , , .
 wyvre, , .
 ynniaw, son of eli, , , .

 ak, held sacred by the ruids, .
 beron, , .
 cean, a blackmaned heifer called, , .
 chall chne, king of the dhe of onnaught, .
 chren, battle of, 
   aer, 
   see Achren.
 ctriallach, son of Indech, 
   the airn of ctriallach, .
 urry, Eugene, , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , .
 din, .
 onaghue, the, .
 onovan, .
 eth and Anoeth, the oneprison of, , , , .
 Flynn, Eochaid, an old Irish poet, .
 gam, writings in, , , , .
 gma, aelic god of Literature and Elouence, , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , 
   his wife and children, 
   his epithets of ermait and rianainech, , 
   his great strength, 
   kills Indech in the battle of oytura, 
   inventor of the ogam alphabet, .
 gmios, a aulish god, .
 rady, tandish ayes, r., , , , , , , , ,
    .
 gyrvran, a ritish god of the nder World, father of wynhwyvar,
    , , .
 erlebys, wooden idol of the, .
 ld Plain, the, .
 ld arum, , .
 lwen, , , , , .
 nagh, ueen of the Irish fairies, , .
 rigins of English istory, r. Eltons, , , , , , , ,
    .
 rkneys, 
   ing Lot of rkney, .
 scar, son of ssian, , , , , , .
 sla ignife, , .
 ssian, acPhersons, .
 ssian, son of Finn mac oul, , , , , , , , ,
    , , .
 ssianic ballads, , , 
   ssianic ociety, see Transactions.
 ther World, the eltic, , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , 
   different names of, , 
   descriptions of, , , 
   variously imagined as upon the sea, , , , 
   under the sea, 
   under the earth, 
   upon earth, , , , , 
   original abode of men, 
   visited by uchulainn, , 
   onn, 
   onnla, 
   ssian, 
   Pwyll, 
   wydion, 
   Arthur, .
   ee also Annwn, Avilion, appy Plain, ag ell, ag on, Land of
      appiness, of the Living, of Promise, of ummer, of the Young.
 usel of ilgwri, .
 vids etamorphoses, .
 wain, son of rien, , 
   ir wain, .
 wl, of wm awlwyd, 
   lodeuwedd changed into an, .
 x, the brindled, , 
   oxen, magic, .
 xford, .

 Paradise, the eltic.
   ee ther World, eltic.
 Parthludd, , .
 Partholon, ,  race of, , , .
 Patrick, aint, , , , , , , , , , , , .
 Pauls athedral, aint, .
 Pausaniass escription of reece, .
 Pedigree of the gods, 
   of Finn mac oul, .
 Pedryvan, aer, , , .
 Peel astle, .
 Peibaw, son of eli, , , .
 Pelasgoi, .
 Peleur, ing, .
 Pellam, ing, , .
 Pellean, ing, .
 Pelleas, ir, , 
   Pelleas and Ettarre, Tennysons Idyll of, .
 Pelles, ing, , , .
 Pellinore, ing, .
 Pembroke, ounty uardian, the, .
 Pembrokeshire, , , .
 Pen Annwn, the ead of ades, a title of Pwyll, , .
 Penardun, daughter of eli and wife of Llyr, , , , , .
 Pendaran yfed, , .
 Pendragon, meaning of the word, .
 Pennant, .
 Percivale, ir, , , , .
 Peredur, , , .
 Perilous glens, the, .
 Persephon, the ritish, , .
 Persia, 
   Pisear, king of, , , .
 Petrie, r., , , .
 Picts, , , , .
 Pigs, in the eltic ther World, 
   of anannn, , 
   of Easal, king of the olden Pillars, , , 
   of Pryderi, , , 
   of arch, , 
   of Angus, 
   ian changed into a pig, .
 Pigskin of ing Tuis, the, , , .
 Pillars, king of the olden. ee Easal.
 Pisear, king of Persia, , , .
 Pixies, .
 Plain of Ill Luck, 
   of the ea, 
   of Adoration, 
   the ld, .
 Pliny, , , .
 Plutarch, .
 Pluto, the aelic, 
   the ambrian, .
 Poetry, the aelic goddess of, 
   cauldron of inspiration and, .
 Policy of the hristian hurch towards obects of pagan worship, .
 Pookas, , , , , .
 Porsena, a oman consul, .
 Poseidon, , 
   the aelic, 
   the ritish, .
 Posidonius, .
 Prophecy of adb, 
   of Eriu, 
   of the seeress to ueen edb, 
   of Lugh to onn the undredFighter, 
   of athbad concerning uchulainn, 
   concerning eirdre, .
 Pryderi, son of Pwyll and hiannon, , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , 
   is stolen at birth, 
   meaning of his name, 
   accompanies rn to Ireland, 
   is spirited away by Llwyd and recovered by anawyddan, 
   receives a present of pigs from Annwn, 
   is killed by wydion, 
   appears in Arthurian legend, .
 Prydwen, Arthurs ship, , , .
 Puck, .
 Puffin Island, .
 Pursuit of iarmait and rainne, The, .
 Pwccas, .
 Pwyll, Prince of yfed and ead of Annwn, , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , 
   changes shapes with Arawn, king of Annwn, 
   his wooing of hiannon, 
   is owner of a magic cauldron in ades, 
   and keeper of the oly rail in the orte arthur, .
 Pwynt aen ulan, .

 ueen uinevere, , , , , , , .
 ueen ab, .
 ueen of the Irish fairies, , 
   of the fairies of unster, 
   of the fairies of orth unster, 
   of the fairies of outh unster, .
 ueene, The Fairie, pensers, .
 uickentree, the magic, .

 aces of ritain, the, .
 athconrath, .
 ealm of lamour, The, a name for yfed, .
 ebirth of uchulainn, 
   of Finn mac oul, .
 ed ook of ergest, see ergest.
 ed ranch hampions of lster, the, , , , , , , ,
    , , .
 ed ranch ouse, the, , , .
 ed ragon of ritain, the, .
 edynvre, the stag of, .
 egan, daughter of ing Leir, , .
 eligion, Aryan, , .
 etaliator, the, the sword of anannn mac Lir, , .
 evelry, the astle of, , .
 evolving astle, the, , .
 evue eltiue, , , , , , , , , , , ,
    .
 hiannon, a ritish goddess, , , , , , , , ,
    , , 
   her three magic birds, , , 
   her name afterwards corrupted into imue and ivien, , .
 hinnon hin arnawd, the magic bottles of, .
 honabwy, , , 
   The ream of honabwy, , , .
 hyd y roes, a ford on the evern, .
 hys, Professor, , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , .
   ee also Arthurian Legend and ibbert Lectures.
 i, oi, an Iberian god, .
 ibble, the river, , .
 iches, the astle of, .
 ience, ing, .
 igor, aer, .
 igosamos, a wargod worshipped in ritain, .
 itual, remains of eltic, .
 ivers, the twelve chief, of Ireland, .
 ivers, the worship of, , .
 odrubn, the sdh of Lugh, .
 omans, the, , , , , , , , .
 ome, , , , , .
 onan, lann, .
 ound Table, ing Arthurs, , .
 ound Towers, the, attributed to oibniu, .
 owantree, , .
 uadan, son of ress and rigit, .
 ude tone onuments, Fergussons, , , , .
 yons, ing, .

 acred animals, , , 
   islands, 
   fish, 
   frogs, 
   stones, , , 
   trees, , 
   wells, .
 acrifices of animals, , 
   human, , , 
   symbolical human sacrifices, , , .
 adb, daughter of odb the ed, and mother of ssian, .
 ages seat, the, , .
 t. atherines ill, 
   t. eorges ill, .
 t. all ., the, .
 aints, transformation of eltic gods into, , , , , , .
 alisbury Plain, .
 almon of nowledge, the, , 
   of Llyn Llyw, .
 amhain, the eltic winter festival, , , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 amhanach, .
 arn Elen, .
 arrlog, 
   aer arrlog, .
 atires, magical, , , , .
 cathach the Amazon, , , , , .
 cn, the river, .
 cot, Eber, a mythical ancestor of the aels, .
 cota, .
 cotti, .
 ea, eltic ideas regarding the, , , .
 econd attle of oytura, The, the arleian . called, , , ,
    , .
 eint real, the, , , .
 enchan Torpeist, .
 en ag, see ld Plain.
 erapis worshipped at York, .
 etanta, original name of uchulainn, , .
 evern, the river, , , , , .
 geolan, one of Finns hounds, .
 hadowy Town, or ity, , .
 hakespeare, , , , , , .
 hannon, the river, , , .
 hapeshifting, .
 harvan the urly, .
 hield, onchobars magic, .
 hony, a ebridean seagod, .
 houts on a hill, the three, , , , .
 icily, , .
 dh Airceltrai, 
   odb, 
   Eas Aedha uaidh, 
   Fionnachaidh, , , , , 
   eadha, , 
   odrubn, .
 dhe, fairy mounds, , , , .
 dhe, The, the aelic gods, or fairies, , , , .
 idi, aer, , , , .
 ilures, tribe of the, .
 ilurian race, the, .
 ilver and, uadas, , , , 
   Lludds, .
 inann, goddess of the hannon, .
 kene, r. W. F., , , , , , , , , , , .
 kye, Isle of, .
 lecht, ag. ee ag lecht.
 lieve loom, 
   lieve Fuad, 
   lieve ish, .
 mallpox, goddess of the, .
 nowdon, , , , .
 ol Apollo Anicetus, a sungod worshipped at ath, .
 olar festivals of the elts, , .
 olinus, aius ulius, .
 omerset, .
 on of the Young, see ac c.
 ore, the river, .
 orrowful tories of Erin, The Three, .
 pain, , 
   used as an euphemism for the eltic ther World, , , , ,
      .
 pear of Lugh, , 
   of Pisear, king of Persia, , , , .
 pearman with the Long haft, .
 peech, Aryan, , .
 penser, , .
 pey, the river, .
 plendid ane, the horse of anannn mac Lir, , , .
 poiling of Annwn, The, a poem of Taliesin, , , .
 pring of ealth, the, .
 reng, a warrior of the Fir olgs, .
 tag of edynvre, the, .
 tokes, r. Whitley, , , , , , , , , .
 tone, lack, of Arddhu, 
   oronation, 
   of estiny, 
   of ineely, .
 tones, worship of, , .
 tonehenge, , , .
 trabo, , .
 trachey, ir Edward, .
 tudy of eltic Literature, atthew Arnolds, , , .
 ualtam, the mortal father of uchulainn, , , , .
 uir, the river, .
 ul, a goddess worshipped at ath, , .
 ummer, the Land of, i.e. the eltic ther World, , .
 un, worship of the, , 
   uchulainn a personification of the, .
 wans, aer and Angus take the forms of, 
   the children of Lr changed into, 
   ider and Etain become, .
 word, of anannn, , 
   of uada, 
   of wrnach the iant, , .
 winburne, .
 wineherds, the rival, .

 Table ound, the, , , .
 Taboos, eltic. ee estiny, easa.
 Tacitus, , , , .
 Tailtiu, the aelic gods defeated by the ilesians at, .
 Tin  huailgn, , , , , , .
 Taliesin, , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , .
 Taliesin, the ook of, , , , , , , , , , .
 Tallacht, burialplace of Partholons people, .
 Tara, , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    .
 Taran, .
 Taranis, .
 Tathlum, a slingstone, , .
 Taw, a river in outh Wales, sacred to wyn ap udd, , , ,
    .
 Teglas well, aint, .
 Teirnyon Twryf liant, , , , .
 Teirtu, the harp of, .
 Telltown, see Tailtiu.
 Temple of odens at Lydney, 
   t. Pauls cathedral occupying the site of a, 
   sacrifices of cattle on the site of a, 
   ancient ritish temples still standing in the sixth century, .
 Tennyson, , , , , , , , , , , .
 Terrace cultivation, .
 Terrestrial gods and goddesses, .
 Terrible room, The, name of the banner of scars battalion, .
 Tethra, a king of the Fomors, , .
 Teutates, a god of the auls, , .
 Thames, the river, .
 Theseus, .
 Thirteen Treasures of ritain, the, , , , .
 Three irds of hiannon, the, , , .
 Three hief oly Families of ritain, .
 Three ounselling nights of Arthur, .
 Three ows of ider, , .
 Three ranes of enial and hurlishness, .
 Three riminal esolutions of ritain, .
 Three Etains, .
 Three Frivolous attles of ritain, .
 Three enerous eroes of ritain, .
 Three wynhwyvars, .
 Three Paramount Prisoners of ritain, .
 Three Plagues of ritain, , .
 Three shouts on a hill, , , , .
 Three orrowful tories of Erin, .
 Three Warknights of Arthur, .
 Three Wicked ncoverings of ritain, .
 Tiberius, the Emperor, .
 Tigernmas, a mythical Irish king, .
 Tighernach, an old Irish chronicler, .
 Tir nam beo, see Land of the Living.
 Tir nan og, see Land of the Young.
 Tir Tairngir, see Land of Promise.
 Titania, .
 Tomb of the agda, .
 Tombs of the Tuatha  anann, .
 Torpeist, enchan. ee enchan.
 Tory Island, , , .
 Toutates, a wargod worshipped in ritain, .
 Tower ill, rns head buried at, , , .
 Transactions of the ssianic ociety, , , , , , ,
    , , , .
 Transmigration of souls, 
   of the swineherds, .
 Treasures of ritain, the Thirteen, , , , .
 Trees, the attle of the, , .
 Trees, worship of, .
 Triads, , , , , , , .
 Trim, .
 Trinity Well, the source of the oyne, .
 Trinovantum, i.e. ew Troy, a mythic name of London, , .
 Tristrem, ir, , , .
 Trouveres, the, .
 Troy, .
 Tuatha  anann, the gods of the ancient aels, , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , , 
   their arrival in Ireland, , 
   their battle with the Fomors, 
   are conuered by the ilesians, 
   retire into underground palaces, , 
   and become the fairies of Irish belief, .
 Tuirenn, son of gma, , , .
 Tuirenn, the Fate of the ons of, .
 Tuis, king of reece, , , .
 Turning astle, .
 Tweed, the river, , .
 Twr ranwen, .
 Twrch Trwyth, the hunting of, .
 Tylwyth Teg, the Welsh fairies, .
 Tynwald ill, .
 Tyrian ercules worshipped at orbridge, .

 aman, sdh of, .
 aran arad, spring of, .
 ffern, the old Place, a name for Annwn, .
 isnech, the hill of, , .
 lster, , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , .
 ndry, the name of the agdas cauldron, , .
 nius, the river, .
 nsenn, the river, .
 rddawl en, see enerable ead.
 rien, an nder World king, , , , 
   riens, rience, ing, in the orte arthur, 
   rianus, ing, in eoffrey of onmouths istory, .
 snach, the sons of, .
 ther en, the Wonderful ead, a name for rn, , , .
 ther Pendragon, Arthurs father, , .

 al des Fes, in the forest of rcilien, .
 andwy, aer, , .
 arro, .
 edwyd, aer, .
 enerable ead, The, .
 erses of the raves of the Warriors, The, , , .
 ictor, son of corcher. ee wyrthur, son of reidawl.
 ita olumb, Adamnans, , .
 ivien, , .

 Wales, the Four Ancient ooks of, , .
   ee kene.
 Walgan, .
 Wall, oman, , , , .
 Warchariots, 
   uchulainns, .
 Warrefield, .
 Waterdress, rians, .
 Waves, the Four, of ritain, .
 Wavesweeper, anannns boat, , , .
 Weapons of the elts, .
 Wells, worship of, , 
   holy, .
 Welsh fairies, , .
 Westminster, 
   Westminster Abbey, .
 White ragon of the axons, .
 Whitehorned ull of onnaught, , .
 White ount in London, see Tower ill.
 Whitetusk, king of the oars, , .
 Wild untsman, the, .
 Wilde, ir William, his Lough orrib, 
   Lady Wildes Ancient Legends of Ireland, , .
 Williams, r. Edward. ee Iolo organwg.
 Wish ounds, the, .
 Woden, .
 Wolf, the orrg takes the shape of a, .
 Women, position of, among the elts, .
 Wonderful ead, the, , .
 Wood of the Two Tents, the, .
 Wordsworth, , .
 Wren, Lleu and the, 
   a bird of augury among the druids, .
 Wydyr, aer, .
 Wye, the river, .

 Yeats, r., The Wanderings of isin, .
 Yell, or Yeth, ounds, the, .
 Yellow ook of Lecan, the, , .
 Yellow haft, one of anannns spears, , .
 Ynys Avallon, .
   ee Avilion, lastonbury.
 Ynys ranwen, .
 Ynys Wair, .
   ee Lundy Island.
 York, .
 Young, Land of the, , 
   on of the, see ac c.
 Yspaddaden Penkawr, see awthorn, hief of iants.

 eus, , , 
   the aelic, , , 
   the ritish, , .
 immer, Professor, .



                          Transcribers note

ariations in accented characters have been retained.

Format of the index has been regularised.

Page , ellico changed to ello, aesar e ello allico

Page , ltude changed to ltude, Introduction  ltude de la

Page , full stop inserted after Pantheon, The aulish Pantheon.

Page , full stop inserted after III, William . Wilde, chap.
III.

Page , double uote inserted after Luchtain, his name is
Luchtain.

Page , double uote inserted after it, not be weary of it.

Page , daugher changed to daughter, the son of our daughter
Ethniu

Page , comma changed to full stop after undalk, oyne and undalk.
The heroic

Page , double uote struck before Then, Then uada declared that

Page , I changed to I, ee chap. I

Page , double uote inserted before for, she said, for I know

Page , double uote inserted after ing, race as onchobar the
ing.

Page , , changed to ,, We ourselves, replied

Page , happend changed to happened, who happened to be assailed

Page , full stop inserted after weeltia, Pronounced ylta or
weeltia.

Page , annann changed to anannn, Ilbhreach son of anannn,
and

Page , full stop inserted after ociety, Transactions of the
ssianic ociety.

Page , capure changed to capture, managed to capture ac
ineely

Page , fourscore changed to fourscore, man of fourscore years
would

Page , Lamhfada changed to Lamhfada, of the aelic Lugh
Lamhfada

Page , full stop inserted after ol, of Wales, ol. I

Page , full stop inserted after ritain, A bardic name for
ritain.

Page , double uote inserted after Pryderi, I see hiannon and
Pryderi.

Page , full stop inserted after it, and could not get it.

Page , full stop inserted after p, hys ibid., p. .

Page , full stop inserted after rn, and the eheading of rn.

Page , full stop inserted after hap, hap. IThe ythological

Page , full stop changed to comma after ritonum, istoria
ritonum, ooks I

Page , full stop inserted after , Iolo ., p. .

Page , full stop inserted after , Iolo ., p. .

Page , full stop inserted after t, were offered at t. Teglas
Well

Page , homriue changed to omriue, et celle de lpope
omriue

Page , a changed to , Introduction  ltude de la

Page , anaan changed to anann, The story of the Tuatha 
anann

Page , anaan changed to anann, on the Tuatha  anann

Page , air changed to aire, aire of ualgne, owner of the
rown ull

Page , Aeif changed to Aeife, emon of the air, Aeife changed
into a

Page ,  changed to , wynhwyvar, , , , ,
.

Page , Lochlannoch changed to Lochlannach, Lochlannach, the,
, .

Page , Porsenna changed to Porsena, Porsena, a oman consul,
.





End of the Proect utenberg Eook of The ythology of the ritish Islands, by 
harles uire

 E F TI PET TEE E YTLY 

 This file should be named .txt or .zip 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in
        httpwww.gutenberg.org

Produced by W and the nline istributed Proofreading
Team at httpwww.pgdp.net This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
ArchiveAmerican Libraries.


pdated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

reating the works from print editions not protected by .. copyright
law means that no one owns a nited tates copyright in these works,
so the Foundation and you can copy and distribute it in the nited
tates without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. pecial rules, set forth in the eneral Terms of se part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Proect
utenbergtm electronic works to protect the PET TEEtm
concept and trademark. Proect utenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
awayyou may do practically AYTI in the nited tates with eooks
not protected by .. copyright law. edistribution is subect to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

TAT FLL LIEE

TE FLL PET TEE LIEE
PLEAE EA TI EFE Y ITITE  E TI W

To protect the Proect utenbergtm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Proect
utenberg, you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Proect utenbergtm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.orglicense.

ection . eneral Terms of se and edistributing Proect
utenbergtm electronic works

.A. y reading or using any part of this Proect utenbergtm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
trademarkcopyright agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Proect utenbergtm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Proect utenbergtm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
.E..

.. Proect utenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Proect utenbergtm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. ee
paragraph . below. There are a lot of things you can do with Proect
utenbergtm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Proect utenbergtm
electronic works. ee paragraph .E below.

.. The Proect utenberg Literary Archive Foundation the
Foundation or PLAF, owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Proect utenbergtm electronic works. early all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the nited
tates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
nited tates and you are located in the nited tates, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Proect utenberg are removed. f course, we hope
that you will support the Proect utenbergtm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Proect utenbergtm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Proect utenbergtm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Proect utenbergtm License when
you share it without charge with others.

.. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. opyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the nited tates,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Proect utenbergtm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the nited tates.

.E. nless you have removed all references to Proect utenberg

.E.. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Proect utenbergtm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Proect utenbergtm work any work
on which the phrase Proect utenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Proect utenberg is associated is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed

  This eook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the nited tates and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or reuse it
  under the terms of the Proect utenberg License included with this
  eook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  nited tates, youll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

.E.. If an individual Proect utenbergtm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by .. copyright law does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder, the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the nited tates without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Proect
utenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the reuirements of paragraphs .E. through .E. or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Proect utenbergtm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs .E. or .E..

.E.. If an individual Proect utenbergtm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .E. through .E. and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Proect utenbergtm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

.E.. o not unlink or detach or remove the full Proect utenbergtm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Proect utenbergtm.

.E.. o not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .E. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Proect
utenbergtm License.

.E.. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. owever, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Proect utenbergtm work in a format
other than Plain anilla AII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Proect utenbergtm web site
www.gutenberg.org, you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon reuest, of the work in its original Plain
anilla AII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Proect utenbergtm License as specified in paragraph .E..

.E.. o not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Proect utenbergtm works
unless you comply with paragraph .E. or .E..

.E.. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Proect utenbergtm electronic works
provided that

 You pay a royalty fee of  of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Proect utenbergtm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Proect utenbergtm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Proect
  utenberg Literary Archive Foundation. oyalty payments must be paid
  within  days following each date on which you prepare or are
  legally reuired to prepare your periodic tax returns. oyalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Proect
  utenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  ection , Information about donations to the Proect utenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing or by email within  days of receipt that she
  does not agree to the terms of the full Proect utenbergtm
  License. You must reuire such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Proect utenbergtm
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph .F., a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Proect utenbergtm works.

.E.. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Proect
utenbergtm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Proect utenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Proect utenberg Trademark LL, the owner of the Proect utenbergtm
trademark. ontact the Foundation as set forth in ection  below.

.F.

.F.. Proect utenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by .. copyright law in creating the Proect
utenbergtm collection. espite these efforts, Proect utenbergtm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain efects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your euipment.

.F.. LIITE WAATY, ILAIE F AAE  Except for the ight
of eplacement or efund described in paragraph .F., the Proect
utenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Proect
utenbergtm trademark, and any other party distributing a Proect
utenbergtm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. Y AEE TAT Y AE  EEIE F ELIEE, TIT
LIAILITY, EA F WAATY  EA F TAT EEPT TE
PIE I PAAAP .F.. Y AEE TAT TE FATI, TE
TAEA WE, A AY ITIT E TI AEEET WILL T E
LIALE T Y F ATAL, IET, IIET, EETIAL, PITIE 
IIETAL AAE EE IF Y IE TIE F TE PIILITY F 
AAE.

.F.. LIITE IT F EPLAEET  EF  If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money if any you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

.F.. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .F., this work is provided to you AI, WIT 
TE WAATIE F AY I, EPE  IPLIE, ILI T T
LIITE T WAATIE F EATAILITY  FITE F AY PPE.

.F.. ome states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

.F.. IEITY  You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Proect utenbergtm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Proect utenbergtm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur a distribution of this
or any Proect utenbergtm work, b alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Proect utenbergtm work, and c any
efect you cause.

ection . Information about the ission of Proect utenbergtm

Proect utenbergtm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middleaged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

olunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Proect utenbergtms
goals and ensuring that the Proect utenbergtm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In , the Proect
utenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Proect utenbergtm and future
generations. To learn more about the Proect utenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
ections  and  and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org ection . Information about the Proect utenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Proect utenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
c educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of ississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
evenue ervice. The Foundations EI or federal tax identification
number is . ontributions to the Proect utenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
.. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address P ox , Fairbanks, A , but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at  orth  West, alt
Lake ity, T ,  . Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundations web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.orgcontact

For additional contact information

    r. regory . ewby
    hief Executive and irector
    gbnewbypglaf.org

ection . Information about onations to the Proect utenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Proect utenbergtm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of euipment including outdated euipment. any small donations
 to , are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the I.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all  states of the nited
tates. ompliance reuirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these reuirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To E
ATI or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation reuirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the nited tates. .. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Proect utenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. onations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate

ection . eneral Information About Proect utenbergtm electronic works.

Professor ichael . art was the originator of the Proect
utenbergtm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Proect utenbergtm eooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Proect utenbergtm eooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the .. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

ost people start at our Web site which has the main P search
facility www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Proect utenbergtm,
including how to make donations to the Proect utenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eooks.

